StereoHCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
LAHORE HIGH COURT 
RAWALPINDI BENCH, RAWALPINDI 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
 
Ghulam Mustafa. 
Versus 
Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal, Lahore etc.  
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
Date of hearing: 
16.11.2023. 
 
Petitioner by: 
Raja Muhammad Riaz Satti, Advocate.  
 
Respondents by: Malik Amjad Ali, Additional Advocate 
General.  
 
 
Shujaat Ali Khan, J:- Succinctly, the facts, as spelt out in 
this petition, are that the Labour Officer (Factories-IV), 
Rawalpindi, 
filed 
report/reference 
bearing 
No.LOF/RWP/NKN/578, dated 15.06.2016, before Punjab 
Labour Court No.VI, Rawalpindi (the Labour Court) relating 
to non-payment of bonus to the workers by M/s UDL 
Distribution (Pvt.) Ltd. (hereinafter to be referred as the 
petitioner-concern) at the end of the financial year, in terms of 
the Industrial and Commercial Employment (Standing Order) 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--2-- 
 
Ordinance, 1968 (the Ordinance, 1968).  Upon service of 
notice, in addition to filing reply to the report/reference, the 
petitioner-concern filed an application under section 54(i) of the 
Industrial Relations Act, 2012 (the Act, 2012) before the Labour 
Court, for return of the challan submitted by the Labour Officer 
which was dismissed vide order, dated 06.06.2017,  against 
which the petitioner-concern filed revision petition before the 
Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal, Lahore (PLAT) but without 
any success as the same was dismissed by PLAT vide judgment, 
dated 11.09.2017; hence this petition.  
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner-concern submits that 
since the petitioner-concern is a trans-provincial establishment, 
jurisdiction of the Labour Court is ousted. Adds that while 
rendering the impugned decisions both the fora below failed to 
appreciate that the Labour Court assumed jurisdiction in 
violation of section 54 of the Act, 2012, thus, the impugned 
orders are not tenable. Further adds that observation of the 
Labour Court that in case matter is referred to the National 
Industrial Relations Commission (the Commission) it would be 
burdened unnecessarily, is ridiculous as jurisdiction of a forum 
cannot be taken away merely on the ground that filing of 
proceedings before it would burden it unnecessarily. Argues that 
since employees of the petitioner-concern are registered with 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--3-- 
 
Punjab Employees Social Security Institution (PESSI) as well as 
Employees’ Old-Age Benefits Institution (EOBI), no action 
could be recommended against it on account of non-payment of 
bonus to its employees at the end of the financial year. Further 
argues that an Inspector appointed under section 29 of the 
Factories Act, 1934 or the Act, 2012, enjoys similar powers in 
terms of section 30 of the Act, 2012 thus the Labour Officer 
could not approach the Labour Court while pressing section 7 of 
the Ordinance, 1968. Relies on Muhammad Shabbir and another 
v. 
Quaid-e-Azam 
University 
through 
Vice-Chancellor, 
Islamabad and others (2022 PLC 82) and Messrs Independent 
Newspapers Corporation (Pvt.) Ltd through Authorized Attorney 
and another v. Province of Punjab through Director General-
Directorate General of Labour Welfare, Labour and Human 
Resource Department, Government of Punjab and 2 others (2023 
PLC 177). 
3. 
While defending the impugned decisions, learned Law 
Officer submits that since the provisions of the Ordinance, 1968 
have been saved under all the amending labour laws and in case 
of violation of any provision of the Ordinance, 1968, the Labour 
Court has exclusive jurisdiction to impose fine upon the violator 
or to award punishment, thus, no illegality has been committed 
by the fora below while rendering the impugned decisions. Adds 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--4-- 
 
that when violation relates to a provincial law, the same is triable 
by a forum established under the said law irrespective of the fact 
that as to whether violator is a trans-provincial establishment or 
not.  
4. 
While exercising his right of rebuttal, learned counsel for 
the petitioner-concern submits that since Supreme Court of 
Pakistan has held in unequivocal words that Labour Court cannot 
take cognizance of a matter relating to a trans-provincial 
establishment, Labour Court misdirected itself while taking 
cognizance of the report/reference filed by the Labour Officer in 
utter violation of the law laid down in the case of Pakistan 
Telecommunication Company Ltd. v. Member NIRC and others 
(2014 SCMR 535) despite the fact that the same has binding 
force upon it in terms of Article 189 of the Constitution of 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 
5. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at considerable 
length and have also gone through the documents, annexed with 
this petition, as well as the case-law, cited at the bar.  
6. 
It is admitted position that the report/reference has been 
filed by the Labour Officer entailing allegation of non-payment 
of bonus to the workers by the petitioner-concern at the end of 
the financial year in terms of Standing Order No.10-C of the 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--5-- 
 
Ordinance, 1968. Indisputably, powers of the Inspectors of 
Mines appointed under Section 4 of the Mines Act, 1923 and 
those of the Inspectors appointed under Section 10 of the 
Factories Act, 1934 and such others persons, not being 
conciliators appointed under the Industrial Relations Ordinance, 
1969 have been encapsulated under Standing Order No.6 of the 
Ordinance 1968, which for convenience of reference is 
reproduced here-in-below: - 
“6. 
Inspectors.– (1) The Inspectors of Mines appointed 
under section 4 of the Mines Act, 1923 (IV of 1923), the 
Inspectors appointed under section 10 of the Factories 
Act, 1934 (XXV of 1934), and such other persons, not 
being conciliators appointed under the Industrial 
Relations Ordinance, 1969 (XXVIII of 1969), as 
Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, 
appoint, shall be the Inspector for the purposes of this 
Ordinance within the local limits assigned to each.  
(2) An Inspector may at all reasonable hours enter on any 
premises and make such examination of any register or 
document relating to the maintenance or enforcement of 
the Standing Orders and take on the spot or otherwise 
such evidence of any person, and exercise such other 
powers of inspection, as he may deem necessary for 
carrying out the purposes of this Ordinance.  
(3) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within the meaning of the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of 
1860).” 
Further Standing Order No.7 deals with penalties and procedure 
for prosecution against an employer which violates Standing 
Order No.6, which is reproduced here-in-below: - 
“7. Penalties and procedure.– (1) An employer who 
modifies the Standing Orders as applicable to his 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--6-- 
 
industrial or commercial establishment, otherwise 
than in accordance with section 4, shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees and in the case of a continuing 
offence, with a further fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees for every day after the first day 
during which the offence continues.  
(2) An employer who does any act in contravention 
of the Standing Orders as applicable to his 
industrial or commercial establishment shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees, and in the case of a continuing 
offence, with a further fine which may extend to 
twenty-five rupees for every day after the first day 
during which the offence continues.  
(3) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of 
this Ordinance, shall, if no other penalty is 
elsewhere provided by or under this Ordinance for 
such contravention, be punishable with fine which 
may extend to one hundred rupees.  
(4) Whoever, having been convicted of any offence 
punishable under sub-section (1), (2) or (3), again 
commits such offence shall, on conviction, be liable 
to double the punishment prescribed for such 
offence under the aforesaid sub-sections.  
(5) No prosecution for an offence punishable under 
this Ordinance shall be instituted except by, or with 
the previous permission in writing of the Inspector.  
(6) No Court other than a Labour Court 
established 
under 
the 
Industrial 
Relations 
Ordinance, 1969 (XXIII of 1969), shall try any 
offence 
under 
this 
Ordinance.” 
(emphasis 
provided) 
According to Standing Order No.7(6), no Court other than a 
Labour Court has the jurisdiction to try an offence under the 
provisions of the Ordinance, 1968, meaning thereby that if any 
violation of Standing Order has been established on the part of 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--7-- 
 
the employer or the worker, the forum is to be determined 
according to the recitals of the Standing Orders.  
7. 
Even otherwise Standing Order No.7(6) of the Ordinance, 
1968 has been couched in negative language barring jurisdiction 
of any other forum except the Labour Court to deal with the 
matters relating to violation of Standing Order No.6 and allied 
matters, thus, it has to be given effect by adopting its plain 
language.  The Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case 
reported as Allied Bank of Pakistan Limited v. Khalid Farooq 
(1991 SCMR 599) while dealing with the effect of the provisions 
couched in negative language has inter alia held as under: - 
“If the requirements of a statue which prescribes the 
manner in which something is to be done or expressed in 
negative language, that is to say, if the statute enacts that 
it shall be done in such a manner and in no other manner, 
it has been laid down that though the requirements are in 
all cases absolute, and neglect to attend to them will 
invalidate the whole proceedings.” 
The above view was reiterated by the apex Court of the country 
in the case of Chaudhry Shujat Hussain v. The State (1995 
SCMR 1249) in the following terms: - 
“8.*****At this stage I may clarify that there is a 
misconception which is some time expressed that if an act 
is provided to be done in a manner it should be done in 
that particular manner otherwise it will be illegal.  This 
cannot be general rule for applying such provisions of 
law.  There may be cases where directions contained in an 
enactment are directory and not prohibitory.  But where 
the language used is in negative or mandatory term for 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--8-- 
 
performance of a particular act, only then it can be said 
that any act done or an order passed in breach of such 
negative or mandatory language will be illegal…..” 
(emphasis provided). 
8. 
Taking up the plea of learned counsel, representing the 
petitioner-concern that since the petitioner-concern is a trans-
provincial establishment, jurisdiction of the Labour Court is 
ousted, I am of the view that functions of the Commission have 
been embodied in Section 54 of the Act 2012, which for 
convenience of reference is reproduced here-in-below: - 
“54. Functions of the Commission.—The following shall 
be the functions of the Commission, namely— 
 
(a)     to adjudicate and determine an industrial dispute in 
the Islamabad Capital Territory and trans-provincial to 
which a trade union or a federation of such trade unions 
is a party and which is not confined to matters of purely 
local nature and any other industrial dispute which is, in 
the opinion of the Government, of national importance and 
is referred to it by that Government; 
 
(b)     to register trade unions and industry-wise trade 
unions of an establishment or group of establishments in 
the Islamabad Capital Territory and trans-provincial, and 
federations of such trade unions; 
 
(c)      to determine the collective bargaining agents 
amongst trade unions and industry-wise trade unions in 
the Islamabad Capital Territory and trans-provincial and 
federations of such trade unions; 
 
(d)     to try offences punishable under— 
 
(i)    Section 67 other than sub-sections (1) and (6) 
thereof; and 
 
(ii)  any other section, in so far as they relate to 
employers or workers in relation to a trade union or 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--9-- 
 
an industry-wise trade union in the Islamabad 
Capital Territory and trans-provincial, and a 
federation of such trade unions, or officers of such 
union or federation; 
 
(e)     to deal with cases of unfair labour practices specified 
in Sections 31 and 32 on the part of employers, workers, 
trade unions of either of them or persons acting on behalf 
of any of them, whether committed individually or 
collectively, in the manner laid down under Section 33 or 
sub-section (9) Section 33 or in such other way as may be 
prescribed, and to take, in such manner as may be 
prescribed by regulations under Section 66, measures 
calculated to prevent an employer or workman from 
committing an unfair labour practice; 
 
(f)      to advise the Government, trade unions and industry-
wise trade unions in the Islamabad Capital Territory and 
trans-provincial, and federations in respect to the 
education of workers in the essentials of trade unionism, 
including education in respect of their right and 
obligations, and to secure the provision of facilities 
required thereof, and to apportion the cost thereof 
between the Government, trade unions and federations of 
such trade unions, and the employers, in such manner as 
may be considered equitable by the Commission, subject 
to the approval of the Government; 
 
(g)     to take measures calculated to prevent an employer 
or workman from committing an unfair labour practice in 
such manner as may be determined by regulations; 
 
(h)     to deal with cases of individual grievance in the 
manners prescribed in Section 33. 
 
(i)      to exercise exclusive jurisdiction over the 
establishment or group of establishments situated in the 
Islamabad Capital Territory and trans-provincial; and 
 
(j)      such other powers and functions as the Government 
may, by notification in the official Gazette, assign to it 
from time to time. 
 
According to the afore-quoted provision, the Commission has 
jurisdiction inter-alia to adjudicate upon the cases of unfair 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--10-- 
 
labour practices specified under Section 31 and 32 of the Act, 
2012. Sections 31 deals with unfair labour practices on the part 
of the employer, which is re-casted herein below: - 
“31. Unfair labour practices on the part of employers.—  
(1) No employer or trade union of employers and no 
person acting on behalf of either shall—  
(a) impose any condition in a contract of 
employment seeking to restrain the right of a 
person who is a party to such contract to join 
a trade union or continue his membership of 
a trade union;  
(b) refuse to employ or refuse to continue to 
employ any person on the ground that such 
person is, or is not a member or officer of a 
trade union;  
(c) discriminate against any person in regard 
to any employment, promotion, condition of 
employment or working condition on the 
ground that such person is, or is not, a 
member or officer of a trade union;  
(d) 
dismiss, 
discharge, 
remove 
from 
employment or transfer or threaten to 
dismiss, 
discharge 
or 
remove 
from 
employment or transfer a workman or injure 
or threaten to injure him in respect of his 
employment by reason that the workman:  
(i) is or proposes to become, or seeks 
to persuade any other person to 
become, a member or officer of a trade 
union; or  
(ii) participates in the promotion, 
formation or activities of a trade 
union;  
(e) induce any person to refrain from 
becoming, or to cease to be a member or 
officer of a trade union, by conferring or 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--11-- 
 
offering to confer any advantage on, or by 
procuring or offering to procure any 
advantage for such person or any other 
person; Page 26 of 51  
(f) compel or attempt to compel any officer of 
the collective bargaining agent to arrive at a 
settlement by using intimidation, coercion, 
pressure, threat, confinement to a place, 
physical injury, disconnection of water, 
power and telephone facilities and such other 
methods;  
(g) interfere with or in any way influence the 
balloting for the determination of the 
Collective Bargaining Agent;  
(h) recruit any new workman during the 
period of a notice of strike under Section 41 
or during the currency of a strike which is not 
illegal except where the Conciliator having 
been satisfied that complete cessation of 
work is likely to cause serious damage to the 
machinery or installation, has permitted 
temporary employment of a limited number 
of workmen in the section where the damage 
is likely to occur;  
(i) close down the whole of the establishment 
in contravention of Standing Order 11- A of 
the industrial and Commercial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Act, 1968 (W.P. Ord. VI of 
1968); or  
(j) Commence, continue, instigate or incite 
others to take part in or expend or supply 
money or otherwise act in furtherance or 
support of, an illegal lockout.  
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to 
preclude an employer from requiring that a person 
upon his appointment or promotion to managerial 
position shall cease to be, and shall be disqualified 
from being, a member or officer of a trade union of 
workmen.” 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--12-- 
 
As far as section 32 of the Act, 2012 is concerned, same deals 
with unfair labour practice on the part of the workmen. 
Conjunctive reading of Sections 31 and 32, renders it crystal 
clear that no-where the Commission has been empowered to take 
up any matter arising out of non-payment of bonus by the 
employer to an employee. It is well established by now that 
jurisdiction of a forum to take cognizance of a matter can be 
decided on the basis of parent statute and if any power has not 
been vested in it, same cannot be allowed to be assumed at the 
whims of a party.  
9. 
During the course of arguments, learned counsel, 
representing the petitioner-concern, has put much emphasis on 
the fact that the Inspectors, referred to by learned Law Officer, 
in relation to Standing Order No.6 of the Ordinance, 1968, have 
also been empowered under Section 29 of the Act, 2012, hence, 
while dealing with an issue relating to a trans-provincial 
establishment, they are bound to act according to the provisions 
of the Act, 2012, thus, the Labour Officer could not file 
report/reference before the Labour Court rather he was supposed 
to file the same before the Commission. With a view to 
appreciate the said plea, I have gone through the provisions of 
Sections 29 and 30 of the Act, 2012, which are reproduced herein 
below: - 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--13-- 
 
“29. Inspector.— The inspectors appointed under Section 
10 of the Factories Act, 1934 (XXV of 1934), and such 
other persons, not being Conciliators appointed under this 
Act, as the Government may, by notification in the official 
Gazette appoint, shall be inspectors for ensuring 
compliance with the provisions of this Act within the local 
limits assigned to each.  
30. Functions of the Inspector.—  
(1) The inspector may—  
(a) at all reasonable hours enter any 
premises and make such examination of any 
register and document relating to the 
provisions of Section 27 and Section 28 and 
Page 25 of 51 take on the spot or otherwise 
such evidence of any person, and exercise 
such other powers of inspection, as he may 
deem necessary for discharging his duty;  
(b) call for such information from the 
management as he may deem necessary for 
the discharge of his functions and the 
management shall provide the information 
called for within such period as may be 
specified by him; and  
(c) make a report in writing to the Registrar 
having jurisdiction of any offence punishable 
under this Act.  
(2) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within the meaning of Section 21 of the 
Pakistan Penal Code. 1860 (XLV of 1860).” 
According to Section 30(1)(a), reproduced above, the Inspector 
has been empowered to make a report in writing to the Registrar 
having jurisdiction of any offence punishable under the 
provisions of the Act, 2012 in relation to violation of Sections 27 
and 28 of the Act, 2012. A joint reading of Sections 27 and 28 
makes it abundantly clear that the same in no manner deal with 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--14-- 
 
payment of bonus by the employer at the end of financial year, 
thus, the plea of the petitioner-concern that the Inspectors 
appointed under the Act, 2012 have the same powers as those 
appointed under Standing Order No.6 of the Ordinance, 1968 
cannot be given any weightage.  
10. 
It is important to observe over here that with a view to give 
effect to the provisions of the Act, 2012, the Commission with 
prior approval of the Federal Government has framed National 
Industrial Relations Commission (Procedure and Functions) 
Regulations, 2016 (the Regulations, 2016). According to 
Regulation No. 63 of the Regulations, 2016, the Chairman of the 
Commission has been empowered to make Standing Orders for 
general superintendence of affairs of the Commission in terms of 
Section 54(i) of the Act, 2012.  Learned counsel for the 
petitioner-concern has not been able to convince this Court that 
if the Ordinance, 1968 had no independent entity as to why the 
Chairman was empowered to make Standing Orders while 
exercising powers under Section 54(i) of the Act, 2012.  The said 
fact also lends support to the plea of learned Law Officer that 
violation of Standing Order No.6 of the Ordinance, 1968 is not 
covered under the Act, 2012, thus the said issue is to be taken up 
in accordance with Standing Order No.7 of the Ordinance, 1968. 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--15-- 
 
11. 
Admittedly, the report/reference filed by the Labour 
Officer is sub-judice before the Labour Court and it is still to be 
seen as to whether any violation, as alleged by the Labour 
Officer, is made out or not, thus, any findings given by this Court 
in relation to the merits of the case would prejudice the case of 
either side, thus the respective contentions of the parties touching 
merits of the case are being left unattended for their decision by 
the forum of competent jurisdiction.  
12. 
Now coming to the case-law, referred by learned counsel, 
representing the petitioner-concern, I am of the view that the 
same is inapplicable to the facts and circumstances of the present 
case inasmuch as in the case of Muhammad Shabbir and another 
(Supra) matter related to compulsory retirement of the petitioner 
which is not the position in case in hand as the said case was 
covered under Section 33 of the Act, 2012 whereas the payment 
of bonus by the employer to an employee at the end of a fiscal 
year having not been covered under the said provision is to be 
governed under the general law i.e., the Ordinance, 1968. 
Likewise, in the case of Pakistan Telecommunication Company 
Ltd. (Supra) matter related to the validity of an order passed by 
the NIRC regarding withdrawal of contempt petition from 
Labour Court No.IV, Faisalabad, which is not the position in case 
in hand. Similarly, in the case of Messrs Independent 

 
 
WP No. 2842 of 2017/RWP. 
--16-- 
 
Newspapers Corporation (Pvt.) Ltd through Authorized Attorney 
and another  (Supra) this Court held that any matter relating to 
registration of a trade union in a trans-provincial establishment 
would be taken care of by the Registrar of Trade Union 
established under the Act, 2012 and not by the Registrar acting 
under the Punjab Industrial Relations Act, 2010 whereas in the 
instant matter, the jurisdiction has been blessed by the legislature 
upon the Labour Court through Standing Order No.7(6) of the 
Ordinance, 1968. 
13. 
Even otherwise, concurrent findings recorded by the 
courts below cannot be upset in Constitutional jurisdiction until 
and unless they are proved to be perverse or result of some 
arbitrariness which is not the position in the case in hand.  
Reliance in this regard can safely be placed on the case of Farhat 
Jabeen v. Muhammad Safdar and others (2011 SCMR 1073). 
14. 
For what has been discussed above, I see no force in this 
petition which is accordingly dismissed. No order as to costs. 
 
Judge 
Approved for Reporting. 
Judge 
G.R.* 

