Stereo.HCJDA 38. 
Judgment Sheet  
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,  
MULTAN BENCH,  
MULTAN. 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
…. 
 
Writ Petition No.3227 of 2022. 
  
Shabbir Ahmad. 
 
 Versus 
 
Additional District Judge, Multan, etc. 
 
 
J U D G M E N T. 
 
Date of hearing: 
 19.01.2023. 
 
Petitioner by: 
Mr. Muhammad Asghar Bhutta, 
Advocate.  
 
Respondent #4 by: 
Mr. Muhammad Jawad Asghar 
Bhutta, Advocate with respondent 
No.4 
 
Respondents#5(i)-(iv) &(vi) Muhammad Mehmood Ashraf Khan, 
Advocate.  
 
AHMAD 
NADEEM 
ARSHAD, 
J. 
Through 
this 
Constitutional Petition filed under Article 199 of the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, the petitioner assailed the 
vires of orders/judgments dated 09.07.2021 and 11.02.2022, 
whereby the learned Courts below dismissed his application for 
correction of order and decree dated 29.03.2019 concurrently. 
 
2. 
 
Facts in brevity are that petitioner instituted a suit for 
declaration 
along 
with 
perpetual 
injunction 
and 
specific 
performance titled “Shabbir Ahmad vs., Public at Large, etc., with 
the contention that suit property consisting upon a shop measuring 
42 ½ square yards bearing property No.189 and 189-A situated at 
Ward No.3, Circular Road, Hussain Agahi, Multan was belonged to 
Muhammad Shafi deceased predecessor of petitioner and 

Writ Petition No.3227 of 2022. 
-2-
respondents No.2 to 8 and after his demise they became owner of 
the said shop according to their legal shares; that respondents No.2 
to 8 through written agreements to sell as well as oral agreement to 
sell transferred their shares in his name and prayed as under:- 
i)  
A declaration may kindly be granted to the effect that 
the plaintiff and defendants No.2 to 8 are legal heirs 
of deceased Muhammad Shafi son of Abdullah and 
except them there is no other legal heirs and being 
legal heirs they are owners of the movable and 
immovable properties of the deceased 
 
ii) 
 that the defendants No.2 to 8 have transferred their 
shares through agreements to sell in his favour and 
decree for specific performance of said oral as well 
as written agreements to sell be granted; & 
 
iii). 
that defendant No.1-A has been asked time and again 
to accept the plaintiff and defendants No.2 to 8 as 
legal heirs of deceased and enter their names in the 
record as legal heirs of deceased but he refused to do 
so, therefore, perpetual injunction may be issued to 
the effect that he entered the name of plaintiff as 
owner in the record. 
 
No one appeared on behalf of defendant No.1 and 1-A despite 
proclamation in the newspaper therefore they were proceeded 
against ex-parte vide order 28.11.2018 whereas, defendants No.2 to 
8 entered appearance on 31.07.2018 and submitted their conceding 
written statement. The learned trial Court after recording ex-parte 
evidence of the petitioner decreed the suit on 29.03.2019 in the 
following terms: -  
“Keeping in view the scenario portrayed above, suit of the 
plaintiff for declaration is hereby ex-parte decree. Plaintiff 
No.1 and 2 to 8 are declared as legal heirs of deceased 
Muhammad Shafi. Decree sheet be prepared accordingly. 
There is no order as to costs. File be consigned to the 
record room after its due completion and compilation.” 
 
Thereafter petitioner moved an application on 03.09.2020 for 
correction of order and decree dated 29.03.2019. The learned trial 
Court vide order dated 09.07.2021 dismissed the same by holding 
that the scope of review is very limited as only some patent errors 
could be rectified in review and the petitioner should have filed an 
appeal against refusal of the reliefs before the learned appellate 

Writ Petition No.3227 of 2022. 
-3-
Court but he failed to do so. Feeling aggrieved, petitioner preferred 
a revision petition which also met the same fate and dismissed by 
the learned revisional Court vide order dated 11.02.2022. Being 
dissatisfied he approached this Court through instant constitutional 
petition. 
 
3. 
 
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner 
maintains that the petitioner specifically pleaded in his plaint that 
the other legal heirs of deceased Muhammad Shafi transferred their 
share in his favour through written agreements to sell as well as 
oral agreements to sell, also executed registered general power of 
attorney in his favour; that the said defendants filed conceding 
written statement in his favour but the learned trial Court while 
deciding the suit failed to consider said aspect of the case and 
omitted to grant relief of specific performance and perpetual 
injunction; that petitioner sought correction of the order and the 
decree but the learned Courts below dismissed his application 
considering it a review application and prayed for acceptance of the 
writ petition as well as his application and setting aside of 
impugned orders. To augment his arguments, he placed reliance 
upon “Syed SAADI JAFRI ZAINABI vs. LAND ACQUISITION 
COLLECTOR AND ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER” (PLD 1992 
Supreme Court 472) “MUHAMMAD AKRAM v. DDCO, RAHIM 
YAR KHAN and others” (2017 SCMR 56) “BANK OF CREDIT 
AND CREDIT AND COMMERCE INTERNATIOAL (OVERSEAS) 
Ltd vs. Messrs ALI ASBESTOS INDUSTRIES Ltd and 5 others” 
(1990 MLD 130), “Mst. FOROSHA V. FAZAL GUL and others” 
(PLD 1983 Supreme Court 220)  and “AMJAD BUTT vs. AMJAD 
ALI” (2017 CLC Note 45). 
 
4. 
 
Conversely, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondents maintained that petitioner did not implead Mehfooz-ur- 
Rehman as party in the revision petition who is a proper and 
necessary party; that the petitioner did not  implead defendants in 
his application as a party; that the Courts below without giving 

Writ Petition No.3227 of 2022. 
-4-
notice passed the said orders; that the application of the petitioner 
did not come with the ambit of Section 152 CPC and while relying 
upon “BAQAR versus MUHAMMAD RAFIQUE and others” (2003 
SCMR 1401), “MUHAMMAD ASLAM LONE vs. ADDITIONAL 
DISTRIT JUDGE GUJRANWALA and 10 others” (PLD 2008 
Lahore 373), “HABIB BANK LIMITED versus IST ADDITIONAL 
DISTRICT JDUGE and others” (2005 MLD 1525), “ANSAR 
MAHMOOD versus JAMSHED AHMED MUSTAFA ZUBERI and 
6 others” (PLD 2015 Islamabd-1), “IFTIKHAR AHMAD and 7 
others vs. HABIB BANK LIMITED,KARACHI and another” (1993 
CLC 101) and “MUHAMAMD YAQOOB vs. BAWAR and 2 
others” (1998 CLC 456) prayed for dismissal of the writ petition. 
 
5. 
 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at length 
and perused the record with their able assistance. 
 
6. 
 
Perusal of record it appears that in para No.3 of the 
plaint petitioner specifically pleaded that through agreement deed 
No.152 dated 10.10.2014, agreement deed No. 54 dated 04.09.2014, 
agreement deed No.667 dated 14.03.2015 and power of attorney 
No.1013 dated 23.04.2015 defendants received consideration of 
their shares in cash and if any defendants did not execute any 
writing, he received his share orally. Therefore, the said defendants 
have no concerned with the suit property and they are bound 
through their oral as well as written agreements to execute 
registered deed in his favour. The exact wording is as under:  
"رارن اہم ربمنی
 
ہی ہک ب  روےئ اق512
 
 رحمرہ ومرہخ2152
-
51
-
51
 
 رار ن اہم
 
و ب  روےئ اق
نمبری 
12
 
 رحمرہ ومرہخ52
-
10
-
12
 
 رار ن اہم ربمن
 
واق
ی666
 
 رحمرہ
ومرہخ51
-
10
-
52
 
 و اتخمرن اہم ربمن
ی5150
 
 رحمرہ ومرہخ51
-
12
-
20
  کی
 رو ےس دمیع ےس دماع مہیلع ےن اانپ ہصح زرِ دقن یک وصرت ںیم ووصل
رکےکچ ںیہ۔ اور ارگ یسک دماع مہیلع    ےن یئت  ریربل ر ک ھ رک د  ی ت  ا  ا دام  یک دای
 اانپ ہصح ووصل رکےکچ ںیہ۔ ایس رطح اُن اک اس اجدیئا  دتموعہی ےس
 یسک مسق اک قلعت نلا واہطس د  ت  ب  روےئ اعمدہہ ن ادنب ںیہ وج ہک زن این و ریربل ری ت ۔ اُیس
 یک رُ و ےس ررٹسجی قحب دمیع رکارک ےنی ےک ن ادنب ںیہ۔"
 
 

Writ Petition No.3227 of 2022. 
-5-
Defendants No.2 to 8 in their conceding written statement admitted 
the said para as “correct” and also admitted the execution of 
agreements as well as power of attorney. The exact wording is as 
under:  
"ہی ہک دمیع و دماع مہیلع ربمنان2  ن ا8 یہ وتمیف ےک اقونین 
 و رشیع وارن ان ںیہ یئت  رگی
 وارث د  ت ۔ اوررقفہ ربمن0 
 رار
 
 رس  میلست ت ۔ اق ن اہم دتموعہی ربمنان
512
 ،
12
 ،
666
 
 و اتخمر ن اہم اعم ربمنی5150
 رحمرہ51
-
2
-
20
 
  رس  میلست
ںیہ۔ یسک مسق اک ذعر و ارتعاض د  ت ۔"  
 
Plaint further reveals that petitioner prayed for specific 
performance of said oral as well as written agreements and grant of 
perpetual injunction.  
In support of his version, petitioner appeared as PW-1 and 
got examined Khizar Hayat as PW-2. He produced sale deed 
No.2035 dated 13.06.1967 as Exh.P-1, whereby, his father and 
Muhammad Usman jointly purchased the suit property measuring 
42 ¼ squares yards from Makhdoom Shahab-ud-Deen, copy of 
registered power of attorney No.1013 dated 23.04.2015 as Exh.P-2, 
copy of PT-1 as Exh.P-3, copy of death certificate of Muhammad 
Shafi as Exh.P-4, copy of death certificate of Muhammad Bashir 
son of Muhammad Shafi as Exh.P-5, original agreement No.54 
dated 04.09.2014 as Exh.P-6, original agreement No.667 dated 
14.03.2015 as Exh.P-7 and original agreement No.152 dated 
10.10.2014 as Exh.P-8.  
In this way he proved through evidence that suit property 
was belonged to their predecessor namely Muhammad Shafi and 
after his demise inherited to his legal heirs and defendants No.2 to 8 
through different agreements to sell agreed to transfer their share in 
his favour and also executed a registered general power of attorney 
in this behalf. Petitioner‟s evidence remained unrebutted. The 
learned trial Court only granted relief for declaration by declaring 
that plaintiff and defendants No.2 to 8 are legal heirs of deceased 
Muhammad Shafi but failed to give any findings with regard to the 
other reliefs of perpetual injunction and specific performance of the 

Writ Petition No.3227 of 2022. 
-6-
agreements to sell. In this scenario petitioner moved the application 
for correction of the order/decree. 
 
7. 
 
Now the question whether the omission in the decree 
to expressly contains reliefs of perpetual injunction and specific 
performance of the agreements to sell could be supplemented in 
exercise of the authority under section 152, C.P.C., it would be 
beneficial to reproduce the section  which empowers the Courts for 
correction of judgment and decree which is reproduced as under: - 
 
“152.Amendment of judgments, decrees or orders.- 
Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in judgments, decrees or 
orders or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or 
omission may at any time be corrected by the Court either 
of its own motion or on the application of any of the 
parties.” 
 
8. 
 
Learned counsel for the respondents raised objection 
that, only the clerical or arithmetical mistakes in judgment and 
decree or order could be corrected in the context of Section 152, 
C.P.C. 
 
9. 
 
Plain reading of said Section it appears that the Court 
under section 152, C.P.C. is not only competent to correct clerical 
or arithmetical mistake in the judgment, decree or order but may 
correct accidental slip or omission as well. Section 152, C.P.C. can 
be conveniently divided into two parts. First half of the section 
provides authority to correct “clerical or arithmetical mistake in the 
judgment, decree or order”, other half after or provides authority to 
correct error arising thereon from any accidental slip or omission. 
Use of word “or” indicates that, such powers to correct are not 
conjunctive but disjunctive and qualified. To correct clerical or 
arithmetical mistake, it means when  some mistake either in 
calculation or numerical figures creeps in, which figures could be 
verified from the record, or where any party, property or fact has 
been incorrectly described or where some typographical error has 
crept in. Second half of the Section 152 (ibid) contemplates “error 
arising thereon from any accidental slip or omission”. Catchword 

Writ Petition No.3227 of 2022. 
-7-
in phrase “accidental slip or omission” as used in section 152, 
C.P.C. is “accidental”, it qualifies „slip‟ and „omissions‟. Thus it 
could be said that “accidental slip or omission” as used in section 
152 C.P.C. means „to leave out or failure to mention something 
unintentionally‟. Thus, it could be safely said that it is only where 
the slip or omission is accidental or unintentional it could be 
supplemented or added in exercise of jurisdiction conferred under 
section 152 C.P.C. Such course is provided to foster cause of 
justice, to suppress mischief and to avoid multiplicity of 
proceedings. 
 
10. 
 
In the light of above discussion, it can be concluded 
that the Court has jurisdiction to correct the clerical or arithmetical 
mistakes or errors caused due to accidental slip or omission in a 
judgment, decree or order. Such power can be exercised at any time. 
The aim of the procedural provisions is to safeguard the interest of 
justice instead of defeating the same. It is the basic principle of 
administration of justice that the Courts are sanctuaries of justice 
and in exercise of authority to do exdebito justitiae, i.e. to say 
wrong and to suppress a mischief to which a litigant is entitled.  
 
11. 
 
In “Ram Singh v. Sant Singh and others” (AIR 1930 
Lahore 210), where the trial Court had decreed the suit but 
inadvertently omitted to mention in the judgment that possession of 
the property be also given to the petitioner. When he applied for 
possession it was objected that as in the decree possession has not 
been awarded it cannot be granted. The petitioner filed an 
application under section 152, C.P.C. for amendment of the 
judgment and it was observed as under:- 
 
“The learned counsel says that if a relief is claimed in the 
plaint but has not been granted by the Court then it must be 
assumed that it has been refused. I do not think this 
argument applies to a case like the present where there is 
no express refusal but only an omission to grant the prayer 
and the omission not a deliberate one. I hold, therefore, that 
the application of the petitioner was competent under 
section 152, Civil Procedure Code and should have been 

Writ Petition No.3227 of 2022. 
-8-
granted by the Court below. In any case if it had been 
necessary for me to do so, I would have revised the order 
passed on the application of the petitioner to be granted 
possession of the property which was adjudged to be his by 
the declaratory decree granted to him by the Court below in 
spite of the fact that an appeal was open to the petitioner 
against the order refusing possession, but he did not file 
one.” 
 
In re: “Raj Raj Bahadur Singh v. Shatranjai” (AIR 1942 
Oudh 226) application under section 152, C.P.C. was made for 
amendment of the judgment and decree and it was observed as 
follow:- 
“We are of opinion that it was only by an oversight that the 
latter portion of the order was not ordered to be deleted. It 
was held in (10) 13 O.C.114:61 C.979, Ashik Husain v. 
Mahdi Hasan that the test is whether the order as it stands 
represents the intention of the Judge at the time he made it 
and if it does then a mistake in it cannot be treated as an 
accidental slip or omission which may be corrected under 
section 152. In this case we are of opinion that the intention 
of the learned Judges was not to make any decision as 
regards the plaintiff‟s right to ten villages and it was only 
by an accidental slip that they omitted to order the deleting 
of the second portion of the order. Section 152 corresponds 
to O.28, R.11 of the Rules of the Supreme Court of Ireland. 
It was held in 1892 A.C. 547: 62 L.J.P.C.24: IR 1.67 L.T. 
722, Henry William Hatton v. Huga Harris on an 
interpretation of those rules that the Court has jurisdiction 
to correct the errors arising out of an accidental slip or 
omission. It was held in AIR 1924 Cal.895: 80 I.C. 55:28 
C.W.No.873, Chandra Kumar v. Sundhansu Badani Debi 
that the word „may‟ in section 152 does not make it 
discretionary with the Court to order the correction but 
merely enlarges the power of the Court by providing that 
such correction can be done at any time or in other words 
the section simply emphasizes that no lapse of time would 
disentitle the Court to make the correction. It is also 
observed in this case that the intention of the law is to make 
it obligatory on the Court whenever such a mistake is 
discovered to correct it and section 152 merely emphasizes 
the duty of the Court by saying that it may be done at any 
time without limitation.” 
 
In a case titled as BANK OF CREDIT AND CREDIT AND 
COMMERCE INTERNATIOAL (OVERSEAS) Ltd vs. Messrs ALI 
ASBESTOS INDUSTRIES Ltd and 5 others” (1990 MLD 130), the 
Court while granting preliminary decree inadvertently did not grant 
relief against the mortgaged property although prayer for decree 

Writ Petition No.3227 of 2022. 
-9-
against it had been made. Subsequently on plaintiff‟s application 
under Section 152, C.P.C., said relief was granted, while 
interpreting Section 152 C.P.C., as under: - 
 
“These observations clearly lay down the principles 
involved in section 152 C.P.C. Where the Court has not 
passed any order unintentionally but due to oversight or 
omission, although in the facts and circumstances of the 
case the party was entitled to such relief, the Court is 
empowered to correct that mistake so that no party should 
suffer due to unintentional omission of the Court. In this suit 
plaintiff was entitled to a decree under Order 34 C.P.C. in 
the normal course. The omission to grant this relief was not 
intentional. The contention of Mr. S.A, Samad Khan that the 
plaintiff should file a separate suit for the sale of the 
mortgaged 
properties 
clearly 
demonstrates 
the 
inconvenience and hardships which shall be caused to a 
party in such circumstances. I, therefore, allow the 
application, amend the judgment that the plaintiff would be 
entitled to preliminary decree under Order 34, C.P.C. in 
respect of the mortgaged properties. The decree should also 
accordingly be amended.” 
 
Such powers can be exercised at any stage. The Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in its full bench judgment reported as 
“Mst. FOROSHA V. FAZAL GUL AND OTHERS” (PLD 1983 
Supreme Court 220)  held as under: - 
“The plane reading of the section, leaves no doubt 
whatsoever that the powers confer on the courts if the case 
falls within the purview of its provisions, can be exercised 
at any time and it has accordingly been held that there is no 
time limit for entertaining an application in that behalf”. 
 
 
The august Supreme Court of Pakistan in its full bench 
judgment reported as “Syed SAADI JAFRI ZAINABI versus LAND 
ACQUISITION 
COLLECTOR 
AND 
ASSISTANT 
COMMISSIONER” (PLD 1992 SC 472) held as under:- 
 
“Section 152 enables a court to correct the mistakes, 
omissions, or error in the judgments, decree or order which 
has crept into it inadvertently and un-intentionally. Such 
mistakes are mostly caused due to inadvertent mistakes of 
the Court. The rules of procedure as provided by C.P.C. or 
intended to foster justice, therefore, no one should be 
allowed to suffer due to the mistake of the court.   
The court has jurisdiction to correct the clerical or 
arithmetical mistakes or errors caused due to accidental 

Writ Petition No.3227 of 2022. 
-10-
slip or omissions in a judgment, decree, or order. 
Depending on facts, it confers a wild discretion on the court 
to correct, (I) clerical, or arithmetical mistake, (II) errors 
caused due to accidental slips or omissions in the judgment, 
decree or order. Such power can be exercised at any time. 
Where the court is bound to grant a relief which the party 
seeks, or where the court is bound to grant relief even 
without it being sought by a party and if unintentionally or 
inadvertently the court does not grant such relief, it would 
be justified at any time to correct such accidental omission 
or errors by exercising power under section 152 C.P.C.” 
 
12. 
 
The law favours adjudication on merits. Technicalities 
should not be allowed to defeat justice. An act of the Court should 
not prejudice any party. Technical objection should not come in the 
way of dispensation of complete and substantial justice. In this 
regard, reference can be sought from case titled “Muhammad Shafi 
and others V. Muhammad Boota and others” (2004 SCMR 1611).  
 
13. 
 
Learned counsel for the respondents maintained that if 
a relief claimed in the plaint but has not been granted by the Court 
then it must be assumed that it has been refused. While relying 
upon “Baqar versus Muhammad Rafique and others” (2003 SCMR 
1401) argued that omission made by Court by positive application 
of mind could never be dubbed as accidental or a mistake apparent 
on the face of record. 
 
14. 
 
Petitioner specifically pleaded in his plaint that 
respondents No.2 to 8 agreed to sell their shares to him and after 
receipt of consideration amount executed agreements to sell in his 
favour. Petitioner produced said agreements in his documentary 
evidence. Respondents No.2 to 8 conceded his stance in their 
written statement. In this scenario reliefs of specific performance 
and perpetual injunction were the basic reliefs, which required 
determination from the Court. Failure on the part of the Court to 
give any findings on said reliefs and to decide in either way did not 
suggest that said omissions were made by the Court through 
positive application of mind intentionally. The learned trial Court 
did not expressly refuse to grant said reliefs. Said omission is not a 

Writ Petition No.3227 of 2022. 
-11-
deliberate one and seems to be an inadvertent accidental slip, which 
squarely falls within the ambit of Section 152, C.P.C.  
15. 
 
The case law referred to by the learned counsel for the 
respondents are not relevant to the facts and circumstance of the 
case, hence, not applicable. 
 
16. 
 
For what has been discussed above, the instant 
constitutional petition is allowed. Impugned orders/judgments dated 
09.07.2021 and 11.02.2022 are set-aside. Resultantly, the 
application filed by the petitioner for correction of order and decree 
dated 29.03.2019 is allowed and learned trial Court is directed to 
make necessary correction in the order and decree dated 29.03.2019, 
keeping in view plaint and evidence of the petitioner by 
incorporating reliefs of specific performance and perpetual 
injunction. No order as to costs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    (AHMAD NADEEM ARSHAD) 
    
 
 
   
       
   JUDGE.  
Approved for Reporting: 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGE. 
 
A.Razzaq*  

