StereoHCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT  
RAWALPINDI BENCH, RAWALPINDI 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Writ Petition No.141 of 2017. 
 
 
Sarwar Masih.    Vs.   Chairman, Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal 
& others.  
 
JUDGMENT 
 
Date of hearing: 30.10.2023. 
Petitioner by: 
Khawaja Muhammad Arif, Advocate. 
Respondents by:
Malik Amjad Ali, Additional Advocate-
General, Punjab.
 
  
 
Shujaat Ali Khan, J: - Briefly put, the facts, as gleaned 
out from instant petition, are that the petitioner, while serving as 
Sanitary Worker in City District Government, Rawalpindi, was 
arrested in a criminal case bearing FIR No.173/2009 registered 
at Police Station Waris Khan Rawalpindi, on 23.03.2009, in 
respect of offences under Article 3 & 4 of the Prohibition 
(Enforcement of Hadd) Order, 1979. During his arrest in the 
aforesaid criminal case, Show Cause Notices were issued to 
him containing allegation of absence from duty and upon 
conclusion of departmental proceeding, major penalty of 
dismissal from service was imposed against him vide order, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--2--
dated 27.07.2009, with effect from 01.04.2009, factum whereof 
was conveyed to him vide letter, dated 06.08.2009 issued by the 
District Officer (Solid Waste Management), City District 
Government, Rawalpindi. After his release from jail in terms of 
Section 249 Cr.P.C., the petitioner submitted an application 
(Exh.R-15) for his reinstatement in service which was 
dismissed, factum whereof was conveyed to him through 
communication, bearing No.HRM/EDO (MS)2367, dated 
02.07.2010 addressed by the District Officer (HRM), District 
Coordination Officer, Rawalpindi. Thereafter, the petitioner 
filed Grievance Petition before the Punjab Labour Court No.VI, 
Rawalpindi (“the Labour Court”) which was dismissed 
through judgment, dated 26.07.2016 against which he filed 
appeal before the Punjab Labour Appellate Court, Lahore 
(Camp at Rawalpindi) (“PLAT”) but without any success as 
the same was dismissed through order dated 29.06.2016; hence 
this petition.  
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that both the 
fora below failed to consider that Show Cause Notices, 
purportedly issued to the petitioner, were never served upon 
him personally. Adds that since the Show Cause Notices were 
issued to the petitioner under E&D Rules, 2000, subsequent 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--3--
proceedings could not be switched over either to the Punjab 
Employees Efficiency, Discipline and Accountability, Act 2006 
(“PEEDA ACT 2006”) or to the Industrial and Commercial 
Employment 
(Standing 
Order) 
Ordinance, 
1968 
(“the 
Ordinance, 1968”), hence, the impugned decisions are not 
sustainable. Further adds that while dismissing the Grievance 
Petition, the Labour Court omitted to note that no limitation 
runs against a void order. Argues that the PLAT instead of 
deciding the matter independently toed the line of the Labour 
Court. Relies on Tanveer Hussain v. Raviryan Limited through 
Managing Director and others (2007 SCMR 737), Azizullah 
Memon v. Province of Sindh and another (2007 SCMR 229) 
and Khurrum Rasheed v. The Secretary to Government of the 
Punjab and others (2017 PLC (C.S) Note 110).  
3. 
Learned Law Officer, while opposing the submissions 
made by learned counsel for the petitioner, states that mere 
wrong mentioning of provision(s) of law was not fatal 
especially when the contents of the Show Cause Notices, issued 
to the petitioner, stood proof qua allegation levelled against 
him, thus, no exception can be taken against the decisions 
rendered by the fora below. Adds that there is no cavil with the 
fact that a forum can condone delay in filing of any proceeding 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--4--
subject to valid reasons but when the petitioner failed to file 
application under section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1908, he had 
no cheeks to claim benefit of Section 76 of the Punjab 
Industrial Relations Act, 2010. Further adds that since the 
petitioner was habitual absentee, the department was left with 
no option but to dismiss him from service. Relies on Khushi 
Muhammad through L.Rs. and others v. Mst. Fazal Bibi and 
others (PLD 2016 SC 872) and Khalid Imran Khan Barki v. 
Government of Punjab and others (2021 PLC (C.S) 426). 
4. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at 
considerable length and have also gone through the documents, 
appended with this petition, as well as the case-law cited at the 
bar. 
5. 
It is admitted position that at the time of issuance of 
Show Cause Notices, the petitioner was confined in jail in 
connection with the afore-noted criminal case. It is not the case 
of the respondents that either the petitioner was served 
personally with any Show Cause Notice(s) or he was served 
through Superintendent of the Jail concerned, meaning thereby 
that till his dismissal from service, he was not served with the 
requisite Show Cause Notice(s) which ultimately culminated 
into his dismissal from service which fact escaped notice of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--5--
fora below while deciding the matter despite the fact that it had 
an important bearing upon the outcome of the request of the 
petitioner for his reinstatement in service.  
6. 
It is well established by now that when a person is 
confined in prison, he can only be served through the 
Superintendent of the prison concerned.  Insofar as the case in 
hand is concerned, though the learned Law Officer addressed 
the Court at reasonable length but was unable to give even half 
a reason for non-issuance of the Show Cause Notices to the 
petitioner through the Superintendent of the Jail where he was 
confined.  The Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case 
of PIRIDNO and another v. Khurshid Begum (1989 SCMR 
880) while dealing with the ramifications of service of notice 
upon a prisoner, without its endorsement by the Incharge of the 
prison concerned, has inter-alia concluded as under:- 
“6. 
We find much force in the submission of the 
learned counsel. In their written statement the 
appellants had taken the plea categorically denying 
having received any notice from the respondent or 
having refused to accept the same. Even in his 
evidence Muhammad Hussain has denied that he 
refused the letter during the time he was in 
confinement. In the circumstances in accordance with 
the rule laid down by this Court the respondent did 
not discharge the onus of proof regarding the service 
of notice. Even apart from this it is rather surprising 
that the endorsement on the letter addressed to the 
appellant while he was in Jail custody does not 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--6--
contain any verification from the Jail authority that 
the letter was offered to the prisoner and was refused. 
It is difficult to conceive of the postman to have 
entered the Jail premises to directly offer the letter to 
the prisoner. Our attention was invited to rules 457 
and 467 of the Bombay Jail Manual which provided 
that no letter shall be delivered to a convict without 
written permission of the Jail authority. Learned 
counsel submitted that under the Pakistan Prisons 
Rules similar position obtains and no letter can be 
delivered to a prisoner until it has been examined by 
the Jail authority. In view of these legal provisions, 
there appears good reason to hold that the letter in 
question was not offered to the appellant. The 
inevitable 
conclusion, 
therefore, 
is 
that 
the 
presumption of due service stands sufficiently 
displaced. In absence of positive evidence that the 
notice was refused by the appellant, the finding that 
he was guilty in spite of service of section 30 notice to 
pay rent, is unsustainable.” 
 
If the fate of the Show Cause Notices, being relied upon by the 
respondents, is seen in the light of the afore-quoted judgment of 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan there leaves no doubt 
that the Show Cause Notices were not served upon the 
petitioner prior to passing of penultimate order against him. 
7. 
A cursory glance over the documents, appended with this 
petition, in particular the Show Cause Notices issued to the 
petitioner, shows that they were purportedly issued under E&D 
Rules, 2000 which, in my humble estimate, were not in vogue 
at the time of issuance of Show Cause Notices to the petitioner. 
Though, learned Law Officer has tried to cross the said hurdle 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--7--
by submitting that mere wrong mentioning of provision of law 
does not render any act of departmental authorities redundant 
but has not been able to convince the Court as to why the said 
defect was not cured even at any subsequent stage despite the 
fact that the petitioner raised such objection on number of 
occasions. If the rules, referred in the Show Cause Notices, 
were not alive as to how it can be considered as a case of mere 
wrong mentioning of provision of law.  
8. 
Considering from another angle, the Presiding Officer, 
Labour Court, has dealt with the case of the petitioner while 
considering it as that covered under Section 15(3)(e) of the 
Ordinance, 1968, despite knowing the fact that procedure to 
hold proceedings under E&D Laws/Rules, promulgated in 
different years by the legislature, has distinct parameters as 
compared to those formulated under the Ordinance, 1968. In 
this background, it cannot be considered mere wrong 
mentioning of provision of law rather it was a blunder which 
prejudiced the case of the petitioner.  
9. 
While addressing the Court, learned Law Officer took 
specific plea that when Show Cause Notices could not be 
served upon the petitioner at his residential address, a 
proclamation was also got published in the daily “Business 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--8--
Times, Islamabad”, thus the petitioner cannot claim that he was 
condemned unheard. To appreciate the plea of the learned Law 
Officer, I have gone through Show Cause Notices, issued in the 
name of the petitioner as well as the referred proclamation, 
which brings it to limelight that on the Notices, issued to the 
petitioner, his address has been mentioned as that of “Union 
Council No.35, City District Government, Rawalpindi”. 
Likewise, no proof regarding service of publication upon the 
petitioner, has been brought on record by the respondents. Even 
if it is presumed that Show Cause Notices were sent at 
residential address the same were inconsequential especially 
when it was known to the department that the petitioner was 
arrested in the above-referred criminal case. Moreover, resort to 
substituted service can only be made when it has been 
established on record that the person concerned has refused to 
accept service of summons/notices issued by a forum.  Though 
learned Law Officer has argued at length but has not been able 
to refer any document to show that upon refusal of the 
petitioner to accept notice issued to him, the competent 
authority decided to get him served with Show Cause Notice by 
way of substituted service in the shape of proclamation in 
newspaper.  The Hon’ble Peshawar High Court in the case 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--9--
reported as Niaz Muhammad v. Abdul Rehman (PLD 2015 
Peshawar 90) while dealing with the result of substituted 
service without establishing that the person concerned refused 
service of ordinary notices/summons has inter-alia held as 
under:- 
“4. 
The report of Process Server reveals that the 
same was not proper and service of the defendant was 
not effected personally at any stage of the 
proceedings. His brother, who resides in separate 
house was allegedly served, which cannot be termed 
as legal/personal service of the defendant. The 
defendant shall be served in person or through his 
agent empowered to receive/accept the service. In 
case defendant is not found on the given address, nor 
there is any authorized agent then service may be 
made through male member of the defendant's family, 
who is residing with him in one house. It is pertinent 
to mention here that it is normal practice especially in 
this part of the area, that service is usually effected 
from servants/"Naukars", who are generally kept in 
house or for that matter in "Hujra" to perform day to 
day routine matters, but since they are not family 
members, therefore, the service effected through the 
servant would be of no value in the eye of law and 
only male member, who is residing in one house 
would be considered as valid service. Once service 
effected upon defendant then the Court gets 
jurisdiction to dispose of the matter. The basic object 
of service on defendant is to enable him to resist the 
claim, if so desires. This is immaterial that defendant 
had 
private 
knowledge 
of 
the 
pendency 
of 
proceedings. Only empowered agent can accept the 
summons. In safe administration of justice the Process 
Servers played a pivotal role, as the reports/affidavits 
sworn by them on the back of notices become a source 
of make or break for the cases. Therefore, they should 
take the pain and gather the exact information, 
inquire about the parties and in case of incomplete 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--10--
service, they are bound to follow the matter more than 
once in order to obtain proper service of the parties 
and should not wait for the fixed date of hearing and 
shall take the matter earlier much before the date 
fixed, so that proper and personal service of the 
parties could be obtained within time. Thereafter, 
shall note-down all these efforts in their reports with 
utmost care and professional sincerity. It is also the 
responsibility of Presiding Officers to look into the 
service effected by the Process Server and if 
necessary summon the concerned officials in order to 
inquire about the authenticity and correctness of 
effected service and should keep vigilance on the 
concerned officials and their reports on the back of 
notices and should not be considered as gospel truth 
in all eventualities rather should be considered 
strictly in accordance with law. They should also 
discourage the trend of "takiya service", the local 
terminology used for those Process Servers, who 
never visited the actual spot rather write-down the 
reports on the back of notices on their own 
imaginations. The world has become a global village 
now, due to fast growing technological devices, 
therefore, every kind of electronic devices be used in 
order to obtain effective service of the parties .i.e. 
Telephone, Telegram, Telex, Fax & U.M.S. etc as well 
as beat of drum and publication in press as envisaged 
by Order-5 Rule 20 of C.P.C. In the instant case, the 
report and sketch prepared by the Process Server 
reveals that one Nisar, brother of the defendant, has 
been shown to reside in separate house adjacent to 
the house of defendant, however, not residing with 
him and, as such, the provisions of Order-5 Rule-15, 
C.P.C have been violated. Similarly, substituted 
service has not been done in compliance to the 
provisions of Order-5 Rule-20 of C.P.C nor, serving 
official has been examined regarding the refusal to 
sign the summons on defendant, has not been find 
mentioned. Even otherwise "substituted service" 
cannot be termed as "due service". The process of 
service through newspaper has also made in 
disregard of law and at an improper stage in isolation 
to other proceedings and that too after recording of 
evidence, which is alien to procedure. The mischief of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--11--
limitation of 30-days has to be attracted where 
summons served personal or from knowledge as 
provided under Article 164 of the Limitation Act. As 
no personal service effected in the instant matter, nor 
procedure provided for service under the law has 
been followed, therefore, ex parte proceedings later 
on culminated into ex parte decree have not been 
passed in line with law.” 
10. 
According to Rule 54 of the Fundamental Rules, when an 
employee has been dismissed from service on account of his 
absence from duty for having been arrested in a criminal case, 
as and when he is released/acquitted, he is entitled for 
reinstatement in service and the said principle has elaborately 
been highlighted by the Apex Court of the country in the case 
reported as Muhammad Aslam Instructor, Animal Husbandry 
Service Training Institute, Daudzai Peshawar District v. 
Government of NWFP through Secretary Food, Agriculture, 
Livestock and Cooperative Department, Peshawar (1998 PLC 
(CS) 1430) wherein the said issue has been clinched in the 
following manner:- 
4. 
Be that as it may, we hold that the appellant 
was acquitted because there was not an iota of 
evidence available on record against him. Learned 
counsel for the respondents relied upon the rule laid 
down in Government of West Pakistan through the 
Secretary, P.W.D., Lahore v. Mian Muhammad Hayat 
(PLD 1976 SC 202), wherein it was held that the 
acquittal of the accused had to be honourable which 
would mean that the allegations were false. In our 
view, the above rule shall not apply to this case for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--12--
the reason that the appellant in this case was tried 
and for lack of evidence, he was acquitted by the trial 
Court. In the referred case, the accused, Muhammad 
Hayat was never tried under any offence by any 
Criminal Court. It may also be noted that the 
provisions of F.R. 54(a) have been declared un-
Islamic by the Shariat Appellate Bench of this Court 
vide Government of N.-W.F.P. v. I.A. Sherwani and 
another (PLD 1994 SC 72). In other words, the F.R. 
54(a) under which the appellant has been deprived of 
his pay and other financial benefits, does not exist on 
the statute book. It is admitted by the learned counsel 
for the parties that term "acquittal" has not been 
defined anywhere in the Criminal Procedure Code or 
under some other law. In such a situation, ordinary 
dictionary meaning of "acquittal" shall be pressed 
into service. According to "Dictionary Macmillan, 
William D. Halsey/Editorial Director, Macmillan 
Publishing Co., Inc. New York, Collier Macmillan 
Publishers London" the words "acquit" and acquittal 
mean:--  
"'acquit"--quitted, -quitting. v.t. 1. to free or clear 
from an accusation or charge of crime; declare not 
guilty; exonerate: The jury acquitted him after a short 
trial. 2. To relieve or release, as from a duty or 
obligation: to acquit him of responsibility. 3. To 
conduct (oneself); behave: The team acquitted itself 
well in its firs) game. (Old French acquitter to set 
free, save, going back to Latin ad to + quietare to 
quiet)" 
 ' acquittal' ' n.1. a setting free from a criminal charge 
by a verdict or other legal process. 2. Act of 
acquitting; being acquitted'."  
The appellant was acquitted by the trial Judge as 
already pointed out above. It shall therefore, be 
presumed that the allegations levelled against him are 
baseless. In consequence, he has not been declared 
guilty. In presence of above meaning of "acquittal" 
the appellant is head to have committed no offence 
because 
the 
competent 
Criminal 
Court 
has 
freed/cleared him from an accusation or charge of 
crime. The appellant is, therefore, entitled to the grant 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--13--
of arrears of his pay and allowances in respect of the 
period he remained under suspension on the basis of 
registration of murder case against him. This appeal 
succeeds and is allowed with no order as to costs. 
If the fate of the impugned orders is seen while putting in 
juxtaposition to the afore-referred judgment of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan, there leaves no ambiguity that both 
the forums below misdirected themselves while deciding the 
controversy between the parties.  
11. 
A cursory glance over the judgment, passed by the 
Labour Court, shows that instead of deciding the controversy 
between the parties on the basis of the material available on 
record, it proceeded on the basis of suppositions, which 
approach cannot be approved of rather deserves to be 
deprecated with full vigor. 
12. 
The observation of the learned Labour Court that since 
the petitioner used to come to a court of law in afore-referred 
criminal case, he could conveniently inform the department 
about his arrest in the said case through his near and dear ones, 
present in the said court, being alien to the established principle 
of law that without service of Show Cause Notice, no 
penultimate order can be passed, carries little weight.  
Moreover, according to Article 4 of the Constitution of Islamic 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--14--
Republic of Pakistan, 1973 a citizen has inalienable right to be 
proceeded in accordance with law and if any deviation is noted 
on the part of the competent authority, the same cannot be 
allowed to be let unnoticed by the judicial forums. 
13. 
During arguments, learned Law Officer put much 
emphasis on the fact that as the petitioner was not acquitted 
rather he was released from jail, under Section 249 Cr.P.C., the 
said release cannot be equated with acquittal, thus he was not 
entitled for his reinstatement in service. In this regard, I do not 
see eye-to-eye with the learned Law Officer for the reason that 
even a person released on bail, prior to his conviction in a 
criminal 
case, 
can 
approach 
his 
department 
seeking 
reinstatement in service. Reliance is placed on Ghazi Khan 
Vehicle Driver Cereal Crops Research Institute Pirsabak 
Nowshera v. Director General Agriculture Research Office and 
3 others (2019 PLC (CS) Note-39). 
14. 
This Court is cognizant of the fact that departmental and 
criminal proceedings have no overlapping effect on each other 
rather the same carry their independent status, however, since 
no inquiry was conducted against the petitioner prior to 
imposition of major penalty of dismissal from service, the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.141 of  2017. 
 
 
--15--
departmental proceedings conducted at his back cannot be 
considered as sacrosanct. 
15. 
As a necessary corollary to the above discussion, I have 
no hesitation to hold that both the forums below failed to 
appreciate the facts of the case in its true perspective and to 
apply the law on the subject, judiciously, thus instead of 
commenting upon merits of the case lest it may prejudice the 
case of either party, I deem it appropriate to remit the matter 
back to the Labour Court for decision afresh. Consequently, this 
petition is accepted and the impugned decisions, rendered by 
the fora below are set aside. As a result, the Grievance Petition 
filed by the petitioner would be deemed to be pending before 
the Labour Court, which shall decide the same afresh after 
attending to all the limbs of the matter. No order as to costs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        Judge 
M. Tahir* 
 

