 
 
Stereo. H C J D A 38. 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Writ Petition No.36910 of 2022 
 
 
 
Ayesha Tahir 
   Versus     Additional District & Sessions Judge, etc. 
 
J U D G M E N T 
Date of Hearing: 
19.01.2023. 
Petitioner by: 
Sahibzada Adeel Hussain, 
Advocate. 
Respondent No.2 by: Mr. 
Irshad 
Ullah 
Rana, 
Advocate.  
       Anwaar Hussain, J.  The petitioner has assailed order of the 
learned Appellate Court below dated 11.06.2022 whereby the order 
dated 31.05.2022 passed by the learned Trial Court under Section 12 of 
the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 („the Act‟), in the application filed 
by the petitioner was set aside and the findings of the learned Guardian 
Court, Lahore were reversed and interim custody of Muhammad Babar 
(„the Minor‟) who is approximately three and half years of age, was 
allowed to be retained by respondent No.2 („the respondent‟).  
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the order dated 
31.05.2022 was interim in nature and the appeal was not maintainable 
and hence, the learned Appellate Court below has exercised the 
jurisdiction, which is not vested in it under the law and therefore, the 
same mandates intervention by this Court in constitutional jurisdiction. 
Adds that even if it is assumed that the appeal was maintainable under 
the law, the impugned order of the learned Appellate Court suffers 
from patent illegality inasmuch as the Minor is of tender age and is 
required to be under the continuous care of the mother (petitioner), 
however, the Minor has been deprived from such care and his interim 
custody has been granted to the father (respondent) who is a banker and 
unable to look after the Minor because of the nature of his job whereas 
the petitioner having been divorced has neither remarried nor doing any 

2 
W.P. No.36910 of 2022 
 
 
job, just for the welfare of the Minor whose custody has been 
forcefully taken over by the respondent. 
3. 
Conversely, learned counsel for respondent concedes that appeal 
of the respondent was not maintainable in terms of Section 47 of the 
Act, however, submits that the petitioner herself left the Minor whose 
welfare lies with the respondent, which should be taken into 
consideration 
by 
this 
Court 
while 
exercising 
constitutional 
jurisdictional as frequent changes of the interim custody of the Minor is 
against the law laid down in  cases reported as “Shaukat Masih v. Mst. 
Farhat Parkash and others” (2015 SCMR 731) and “Muhammad 
Hassan Arif v. Additional District Judge and others” (2022 MLD 323). 
4. 
Arguments heard. Record perused.  
5. 
Though learned counsel for the respondent has conceded as to 
non- maintainability of the appeal against order passed under Section 
12 of the Act by the learned Guardian Court, in terms of Section 47 of 
the Act, this Court feels appropriate to first address the said issue as it 
is settled law that the consent of the parties neither confers nor takes 
away jurisdiction of the Court. In addition, if this Court reaches the 
same conclusion that the order passed by the Appellate Court was 
devoid of jurisdiction, the same in turn, restores the order of the learned 
Trial Court. On the other hand, if the appeal is held to be maintainable, 
then this Court would proceed to determine if the order of the learned 
Trial Court has been upended in consonance with law and facts of the 
case or not.    
6. 
Section 47 of the Act deals with the appealable orders and 
admittedly, order passed under Section 12 of the Act is not mentioned 
thereunder. However, after insertion of the word „Guardianship‟ in the 
First Schedule of The West Pakistan Family Courts Act, 1964 (“the 
Act 1964”), the remedy by way of the appeal is available against an 
order under Section 12 of the Act before the learned Appellate Court  
as per Section 14 of the Act 1964, which is reproduced as under:   

3 
W.P. No.36910 of 2022 
 
 
“Appeal. – (1) Notwithstanding anything provided in 
any other law for the time being in force, a decision 
given or a decree passed by a Family Court shall be 
appealable– 
(a)    to the High Court, where the Family Court is 
presided over by a District Judge, an Additional 
District Judge, or a person notified by 
Government to be of the rank and status of a 
District Judge or an Additional District Judge.  
(b)    to the District Court, in any other case. 
(2)       No appeal shall lie from a decree by a Family 
Court– 
(a)    for dissolution of marriage, except in the case 
of dissolution for reasons specified in clause (d) 
of item (viii) of Section 2 of the Dissolution of 
Muslim Marriages Act, 1939, 
(b)    for dower or dowry not exceeding rupees one 
hundred thousand; 
(c)    for maintenance of rupees four thousand or less 
per month. 
 (3)       No appeal or revision shall lie against an 
interim order passed by a Family Court. 
(4)       The appellate Court referred to in sub-section 
(1) shall dispose of the appeal within a period of four 
months.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 As per Section 47 of the Act, an order under Section 12 thereof is 
apparently not appealable, however, provisions of the Act must be read 
in conjunction with the provisions of the Act 1964 as the legislature in 
its wisdom has brought the matters pertaining to „Guardianship‟ under 
the jurisdiction of the Family Courts by contemplating that all the 
matters pertaining to „Guardianship‟ shall be exclusively triable by the 
Family Courts created under the Act 1964 which is a latter enactment. 
It is settled principle of interpretation that the latter enactment shall 
prevail over the earlier legislation. One cannot lose sight of the fact that 
subsection (1) of Section 14 of the Act 1964 begins with the words 

4 
W.P. No.36910 of 2022 
 
 
„notwithstanding anything provided in any other law for the time being 
in force, a decision given or a decree passed by a Family Court shall 
be appealable‟, thus the latter provision has an overriding effect. 
Meaning thereby that in spite of the fact that order under Section 12 of 
the Act is not mentioned under Section 47 thereof, an appeal can be 
preferred against an order passed under Section 12 as the same is a 
„decision‟ given by a Family Court as mentioned in Section 14(1) of 
the Act 1964, and also not hit by Section 14(3) thereof as such decision 
disposes of the application under Section 12 of the Act. It is imperative 
to note that whether the order passed on application under Section 12 
of the Act, being appealable or not came up for adjudication before a 
learned Division Bench of this Court in case bearing ICA No.69878 of 
2022, titled “Mst. Shabeena Younas v. Addl. District Judge, Lahore, 
etc” [2022 LHC 8087] (reportable and available at website of this 
Court). While scanning catena of judgments on the subject, the said 
learned Division Bench held that the order passed on application under 
Section 12 of the Act is appealable after insertion of the word 
„Guardianship‟ in the First Schedule of the Act 1964. Therefore, the 
argument of learned counsel for the petitioner as well as the conceding 
statement of learned counsel for the respondent is misconceived.  
7.  
Having held that the learned Appellate Court below had the 
jurisdiction to entertain the appeal preferred by the respondent against 
the order passed by the learned Guardian Court under Section 12 of the 
Act, for rendering opinion of this Court on merits of the case, it would 
be appropriate to reproduce Section 12(1) of the Act in order to 
understand the scope and object of said provision viz. welfare of a 
minor. Section 12(1) reads as under: 
“12. Power to make interlocutory order for 
production of minor and interim protection of 
person and property. (1) The Court may direct that 
the person, if any, having the custody of the minor 
shall produce him or cause him to be produced at such 
place and time and before such person as it appoints, 
and may make such order for the temporary custody 

5 
W.P. No.36910 of 2022 
 
 
and protection of the person or property of the minor as 
it thinks proper.” 
A plain reading of Section 12(1) of the Act makes it crystal clear that 
the learned Guardian Court is empowered to make interlocutory orders 
for production of a minor and interim protection of his person and/or 
property as the Guardian Court has parental jurisdiction over him. The 
overarching and controlling position held by the welfare of a minor in 
granting his permanent custody under Section 25 of the Act is equally 
applicable to the grant of interim custody under Section 12 of the Act. 
The order under Section 12 of the Act is tentative in nature and passed 
at a stage when the evidence is not yet recorded. Hence, the order 
under Section 12 of the Act is subservient to the order passed under 
Section 25 thereof. However, welfare of a minor remains central even 
at the time of deciding application under Section 12 of the Act. In this 
regard, case reported as “Zahid Mehmood and another v. Mst. 
Rehana”(1980 CLC 1027) is referred. It is imperative to note that it 
defeats the legislative intent and object of the law if the paramount 
interest of welfare of a minor is considered supreme and dominant 
feature only at the time of deciding application under Section 25 of the 
Act and not so at the time of deciding an application under Section 12 
thereof. However, the decision under Section 12 of the Act should not 
put on semblance or attire of an order under Section 25 thereof as the 
former is tentative in nature. Thus, the welfare of a minor is always to 
be controlling force at every stage and decision made under Section 12 
is no exception.  
8. 
Similarly, it is well settled principle of law that the combat 
between the parents as to custody of a minor should never be allowed 
to morph into a battle which makes the welfare of a minor a collateral 
damage rather the welfare of a minor should get precedence over the 
egoistic battle between the competing parents. In a clash between the 
rights of parents and the welfare of a minor, the latter must prevail. 
Similarly, to be in proper custody is a right of a child and not of either 

6 
W.P. No.36910 of 2022 
 
 
of the parents meaning thereby that it is the welfare of minor that ought 
to be considered and not that of the person seeking custody.  
9. 
In the instant case, there is no denial of the fact that marriage 
between the parties has already been dissolved after the petitioner was 
divorced by the respondent. While allowing the respondent to retain the 
custody of the Minor, the learned Appellate Court has put forth the 
following reasons:  
“08….In the respondent‟s application under Section 12 of 
the Act, the reliance was placed on the averments made in 
the main petition under Section 25 of the Act premised on 
the welfare of the Minor with the mother as with also the 
averments that the appellant is fulltime bank employee 
and as such unable to pay due attention to the Minor. It 
goes without saying that Section 12 of the Guardians & 
Wards Act, 1890, deals with emergent situations and 
vests the Guardian Court with powers to direct 
production of the minor(s) and to make such order as may 
be deemed proper keeping in view their welfare and the 
Family Court is empowered to intervene where the 
circumstances are extraordinary and entail an element of 
urgency suggesting that the given minor(s) shall suffer 
irreparable loss as to health, education etc. or if, 
otherwise, the minor(s) is/are subject to extreme 
environmental maladjustment. Given this criterion, the 
respondent‟s application under Section 12 of the Act 
divulges no emergent situation or circumstances 
suggesting irreparable loss to the health, education or 
extreme environmental maladjustment which could 
warrant change of interim custody of the Minor from the 
hands of the appellant/father with whom the Minor was 
living since December 2020, to the mother while the 
main petitions of both the sides to determine the question 
of welfare of the Minor are pending adjudication. Hence, 
the Impugned Order is not sustainable in the eye of law.”   
(Emphasis supplied) 
Perusal of the operative part of the impugned judgment reveals that 
while too much emphasis has been laid upon the fact that the Minor 
will not suffer if the respondent is allowed to retain the custody as no 
harm will be caused to health or education of the Minor, learned 
Appellate Court below ignored the fact that the Minor was born on 
26.09.2018 and was of tender age. As per Para 3 of the guardian 

7 
W.P. No.36910 of 2022 
 
 
petition filed by the respondent, the petitioner left the Minor on 
01.05.2021 and due to her alleged bad character, the respondent 
divorced the petitioner on 20.08.2021 and purportedly an agreement 
was signed between them regarding custody of the Minor whereby she 
relinquished her rights in favour of the respondent viz. custody of the 
Minor. Meaning thereby that the Minor was residing with the petitioner 
at least till 01.05.2021, just few months before filing of guardian 
petition by the respondent. On the other hand, it is the case of the 
petitioner that she was ousted from the house by the respondent on 
06.12.2020 along with the Minor and it is on 28.08.2021 at 6.00 P.M. 
that the respondent in the garb of meeting the Minor forcibly took the 
Minor. At this juncture, it is imperative to examine the validity of an 
agreement by the mother relinquishing her right to custody of the 
Minor. It is important to observe in this regard that any such agreement 
is neither valid nor enforceable agreement and cannot be used as a tool 
to deprive a mother of her right to custody. The august Supreme Court 
in case titled as “Mst. Beena v. Raja Muhammad and others” (PLD 
2020 SC 508) held as under: 
“8…….The agreement to the extent that the mother 
surrendered the custody of her child or which stopped the 
mother to claim his custody is not lawful consideration; it 
is contrary to the Islamic principles governing hizanat and 
the law determining the custody of minors and thus 
forbidden. An agreement the object or consideration of 
which is against public policy is void, as stipulated in 
section 23 of the Contract Act……” 
The Hon‟ble apex Court went onto further observe as under: 
“The welfare of the minor cannot be relegated to the 
personal interest of the father and such a clause or 
condition is against public policy. The clause in the 
agreement whereby the mother agreed to give up her son‟s 
physical custody and/or not claim it is also without 
consideration. The welfare of a minor cannot be subsumed 
by the interest of his father, and if this is done it will be 
against public policy, and such clause or condition will be 
void. Such a stipulation will also be void under section 25 
of the Contract Act because it is without consideration.” 

8 
W.P. No.36910 of 2022 
 
 
Thus, any clause or the agreement having effect of surrendering or 
relinquishing right of custody of the mother is void and unlawful being 
against the public policy and without consideration. Moreover, as per 
Para 352 of „Muhammadan Law‟ by D.F. Mulla, a mother is entitled to 
the custody (hizanat) of her male child until he has completed the age 
of seven years and of her female child until she has attained puberty. 
Only rider put on the right of mother is her second marriage. The 
august Supreme Court of Pakistan in “Raja Muhammad Owais v. Mst. 
Nazia Jabeen and others” (2022 SCMR 2123) went onto observe that 
even second marriage of the mother is not a determinative factor in this 
regard rather the welfare of minor is paramount consideration in 
determining the right of custody.  
10. 
Having had above legal position in sight, it is well evident that 
the Minor was living with the mother (petitioner) as on 01.05.2021 as 
per contentions of the respondent himself as contained in his pleadings 
before the learned Guardian Court and the most crucial factor which 
was required to be measured up while deciding as to who should be 
given the interim custody of the Minor is the age of the Minor at the 
time of filing of the guardian petition which in the instant case was 
about three and half years at the time of filing of the guardian petition 
and is merely around four years at present and depriving the Minor of 
such tender age, at an interim stage, from the love and care which a 
mother can extend is certainly not in his best interest that has far 
reaching impact on mental and physical upbringing of the Minor, 
which is not the object of Section 12 of the Act. This was precisely the 
reason that persuaded the learned Guardian Court to allow the 
application of the petitioner under Section 12 of the Act, since it is the 
duty of the learned Guardian Court to secure the best interest and 
welfare of the Minor. Once the learned Guardian Court has exercised 
its jurisdiction in granting interim custody, the same should be allowed 
to stay, unless there are compelling circumstances to change the 
custody. Even other-wise, order of temporary custody of the Minor 

9 
W.P. No.36910 of 2022 
 
 
being interim in nature, would be subject to decision in the main case. 
It is all the more important and in the welfare of the Minor to hand over 
the interim custody to the petitioner given the fact that she has been 
divorced by alleging and imputing bad character to her and distance 
between the Minor and the mother at tender age may result in 
hardening of such allegations in the malleable mind of the Minor even 
though such allegations may remain mere allegations. Therefore, the 
learned Appellate Court below should not have interfered in the interim 
custody of the Minor, given to the petitioner by the learned Guardian 
Court for the time being, till final determination by the learned 
Guardian Court, under Section 25 of the Act. During the course of 
arguments, much emphasis was placed by learned counsel for the 
respondent on case of Shaukat Masih, supra, which has been followed 
by this Court in case of Muhammad Hassan Arif, supra with the 
contention that handing over the custody of the Minor to the petitioner 
would amount to make the Minor ping-pong between the parents. 
There is no cavil to the position that the Minor should not be made to 
ping pong between the parents in their mutual egoistic tussle but this 
aspect has to be weighed in and measured up keeping in view the 
welfare of the Minor as it is the learned Guardian Court, in the instant 
case, which handed over the custody of the Minor to the 
petitioner/mother and the learned Appellate Court below upended the 
order of the learned Guardian Court, which has been impugned through 
the present constitutional petition and in fact, intervention by the 
learned Appellate Court below made the Minor ping pong. Even 
otherwise, this Court in view of Para 352 of „Muhammadan Law‟ by 
D.F. Mulla and the judgment of the august Supreme Court in case of 
Raja Muhammad Owais supra is obligated to keep the welfare of the 
Minor as paramount. As a general rule, it is presumed that welfare of a 
male child lies with the mother till he attains age of 7 years and it is 
upon the father to prove that the mother is not entitled to permanent 
custody and her case falls into exceptions, which certainly requires 

10 
W.P. No.36910 of 2022 
 
 
recording of evidence and in the instant case the same is subject matter 
of the guardian petition, filed by both sides.   
11. 
In view of the above discussion, this constitutional petition is 
allowed, the impugned judgment of learned Appellate Court is set-
aside and order of the learned Guardian Court dated 31.05.2022 is 
restored. Meanwhile, the meeting schedule chalked out by the learned 
Guardian Court shall be observed. Before parting with, admittedly, 
respective guardian petitions of the parties, under the Act, are still 
pending before the learned Guardian Court, which require expeditious 
decision, therefore, the learned Guardian Court is directed to decide the 
same preferably within a period of three months from the receipt of 
certified copy of this judgment and if need be, the same may be heard 
on day-to-day basis.  
 
(ANWAAR HUSSAIN) 
                Judge  
           Approved for reporting. 
 
      Judge 
Maqsood 
 
 

