Form No.HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Case Diary No.9494 of 2023. 
 
Chairman National Highway Authority and another. 
Versus 
Abdul Hameed etc.  
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
 
 
OBJECTION CASE. 
 
 
20.01.2023. 
Mr. Azmat Hayat Khan Lodhi, Advocate for the 
petitioners. 
 
 
Office 
has 
raised 
objection 
against 
maintainability of this petition on the ground that the 
petitioners should avail the proper remedy against the 
impugned order. 
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that 
since the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (the Act, 1894) is a 
special law, remedy of appeal is to be governed under the 
said enactment and not the CPC. Adds that since the 
petitioners are debarred to file appeal they have no 
remedy except to file the Writ Petition. Relies on The 
Land Acquisition Collector, Pak-Arab Refinery Limited 
and others v. Khan (deceased) and others (2019 MLD 
968), Punjab Province through Secretary to Government 
of the Punjab, Housing and Physical Planning 
Department and 4 others v. Muhammad Ishaque (2005 
YLR 148), ICI Pakistan Manufacturers Ltd. v. Salah-ud-
Din and 3 others (1988 MLD 980) and Muhammad Fazil 
Khan and 3 others v. Azad Government of the State of 

 
 
Objection Case Diary No.9494 of 2023. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__2___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
Jammu and Kashmir through Chief Secretary and 9 
others (2017 YLR Note 400). 
3. 
After hearing learned counsel for the petitioners 
and going through the documents, annexed with this 
petition, I have noted that in this petition the petitioners 
have assailed vires of order, dated 24.10.2022, passed by 
the learned Senior Civil Judge (Civil Division), Kasur 
(respondent No.2), whereby their application seeking 
setting aside of ex-parte proceedings, dated 27.09.2016 
and ex-parte decree, dated 09.11.2021, was dismissed. In 
ordinary course, an order dismissing application filed 
under Order IX rule 13 CPC is appealable in terms of 
Order XLIII CPC. As far as proceedings on a Reference, 
filed under section 18 of the Act, 1894, are concerned, 
the same are to be governed under CPC in terms of 
section 53 of the Act, 1894 which for convenience of 
reference is reproduced herein below: - 
“53. Code of Civil Procedure to apply to 
proceedings before Court.– Save in so far as they 
may be inconsistent with anything contained in 
this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil 
Procedure shall apply to all proceedings before 
the Court under this Act.” 
From the above, it is crystal clear that the procedure 
provided under CPC is applicable to proceedings before 
the Referee Court until and unless it has specifically 
been ousted. The High Court of Sindh, in the case of 
Province of Sindh, Secretary Board of Revenue, 

 
 
Objection Case Diary No.9494 of 2023. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__3___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
Government of Sindh through District Officer v. Deputy 
District Officer (Rev) and 2 others (2015 YLR 209), 
while dealing with remedy against order dismissing an 
application for setting aside of ex-parte proceedings and 
decree, passed by a Referee Court, has inter-alia held as 
under: - 
“7. I have heard the learned A.A.G. and the 
learned counsel for respondents 2 and 3, perused 
the record, and have also examined the law cited 
at the bar. I shall first deal with- the preliminary 
objection that this appeal is barred by limitation. 
By virtue of section 53 of the Land Acquisition 
Act, 1894, the provisions of C.P.C. have been 
made applicable to all proceedings under the said 
Act before the Court. Section 54 of the said Act 
provides that subject to the provisions of C.P.C. 
applicable to appeals from original decrees, an 
appeal shall only lie in any proceedings under the 
said Act to the High Court from the award, or any 
part of the award, of the Court. It is clear from the 
language of section 54 ibid that no appeal shall lie 
to the High Court from an order of the Court 
which is not an award or any part thereof. In my 
view, the provisions of C.P.C. applicable to 
appeals from original decrees have been made 
applicable to appeals against the award or any 
part thereof because of the reason that rights and 
liabilities of the parties are determined finally and 
conclusively in awards as are determined in 
original decrees. In the instant case, admittedly 
the award, or any part thereof, was not given by 
the Court and the application was dismissed for 
non-prosecution 
without 
any 
conclusive 
determination or adjudication of the rights and 
liabilities of the parties. Therefore, the appeal 
could not be filed under section 54 ibid or under 
section 96, C.P.C. 
8. In view of the applicability of the provisions of 
C.P.C. to the proceedings under the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894, I agree with the learned 
counsel for respondents 2 and 3 that the appeal 
ought to have been filed by the appellant before 
this Court under Rule 1(c) of Order XLIII, 
C.P.C., which specifically provides an appeal 

 
 
Objection Case Diary No.9494 of 2023. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__4___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
against an order under Order IX, Rule 9, C.P.C. 
rejecting an application to set aside the dismissal 
of a Suit. Since the impugned order of rejecting 
the application for setting aside the dismissal of 
application was passed by a Court subordinate to 
this Court, the relevant provision of limitation for 
filing an appeal in this case would be Article 153 
of the First Schedule of the Limitation Act, 1908. 
Article 153 ibid prescribes limitation of 30 days 
for filing an appeal under C.P.C. to High Court 
from an order of a subordinate Court, and the 
period is to be computed from the date of the 
order. In view of the said specific provision for a 
specific situation, residuary Article 181 of the 
First Schedule of the Limitation Act, 1908, relied 
upon by the learned A.A.G., shall not apply in the 
present case as the said Article is attracted only to 
cases where no limitation is provided elsewhere in 
the First Schedule of the Limitation Act, 1908.” 
(emphasis provided). 
4. 
It is astonishing to note that one the one hand 
learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that the 
provisions of CPC are not applicable to the Reference 
filed under section 18 of the Act, 1894 but on the other 
himself opted to file application under Order IX rule 13 
CPC. It is well entrenched by now that when a party opts 
to file proceedings under any law, further remedy is 
governed under the same law. Insofar as the case in hand 
is concerned, when the petitioner himself filed 
application under Order IX rule 13 CPC for setting aside 
of ex-parte proceedings and decree, further remedy is to 
be governed under CPC and not the Act, 1894, especially 
when the appeal provided under the Act, 1894, is 
inapplicable in the present case. 
5. 
Now coming to the case-law, cited by learned 
counsel for the petitioners, I am of the view that the same 

 
 
Objection Case Diary No.9494 of 2023. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__5___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
is inapplicable to the facts and circumstances of the 
present case inasmuch as in the case of The Land 
Acquisition Collector, Pak-Arab Refinery Limited and 
others (Supra) the question in pith and substance was the 
jurisdiction of the Civil Court to entertain any 
matter/application in contravention to the provisions of 
the Act, 1894 which is not the position in the case in hand 
rather the question involved in this matter is the remedy 
available to an aggrieved person against an order 
dismissing application for setting aside of ex-parte 
proceedings and decree. Likewise, in the case of 
Muhammad Fazil Khan and 3 others (Supra) the 
Supreme Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir has held 
that since the Referee Court is not subordinate to the 
District Court, no order passed by the Referee Court is 
revisable before District Court. I agree with the 
conclusion arrived at by the Supreme Court of Azad 
Jammu and Kashmir to the extent that no order of 
Referee Court can be challenged before the District Court 
but the said judgment cannot be used to oust the 
jurisdiction of this Court to entertain an appeal under 
Order XLIII CPC. So far as the case of Punjab Province 
through Secretary to Government of the Punjab, Housing 
and Physical Planning Department and 4 others (Supra) 
is concerned, suffice it to note that in the said case it has 
been decided that in the event of inconsistency between 

 
 
Objection Case Diary No.9494 of 2023. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__6___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
the provisions of CPC and the Act, 1894, the latter being 
special law would prevail which is not the position in the 
case in hand. Taking up the case of ICI Pakistan 
Manufacturers Ltd. (Supra), I have noted that a learned 
Division Bench of this Court has held that after 
announcement of Award the government has no right of 
appeal which has not even remotest connectivity with the 
case in hand. Further, in the case of Military Estates 
Officer, Hazara Circle, Abbottabad and another v. Pir 
Khan and another (1980 CLC 1467) the said question 
has been responded in the following manner: - 
 “Since the Central Government in the present 
case was a party before the Reference Court and 
is interested in the result of the litigation, as the 
cost of acquisition is to be defrayed by it, we are 
of the view that even on the basis of the rule laid 
down by the Supreme Court in the above-cited 
case, it (Central Government) was entitled to 
maintain the present appeals. We, therefore, hold 
that the present appeals preferred by the Central 
Government are maintainable.” 
6. 
For what has been discussed above, I have no 
hesitation to hold that the order impugned in this petition 
is appealable in terms of Order XLIII CPC, thus, the 
Office Objection is sustained being well-based.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shujaat Ali Khan) 
Judge 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Judge 
G R * 

