 
 
Form No.HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE  
       JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
W.P. No.81179 of 2022. 
Muhammad Zuhaib Ishaq.  
   Versus 
SCJ, etc. 
S.No.of 
order/ 
Proceeding 
Date of  
Order/ 
Proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties’ counsel, where 
necessary 
30.01.2023 
Mr. Muhammad Asif Mughal, Advocate for the petitioner. 
In the instant petition under Article 199 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 
(‘Constitution”), the petitioner has assailed the order dated 
01.11.2022 passed by the learned Senior Civil Judge 
(Family Division), Jhang dismissing application of the 
petitioner for cross-examination of the PWs once again on 
the ground that it slipped from mind of his counsel during 
earlier cross-examination that suit for dissolution of 
marriage, maintenance and recovery of dowry articles 
filed by respondents No.2 to 4 was consolidated with the 
custody petition filed by the petitioner and his counsel did 
not cross-examine the said witnesses to the extent of 
custody petition.  
2. 
The operative part of the impugned order states as 
follows:- 
“Perusal of the record reveals that suit filed by the 
plaintiffs/respondents as well as the petition filed by 
the petitioner/defendant were consolidated vide order 
dated 11.09.2021 and consolidated issues were 
framed. Perusal of the record further reveals that on 
18.11.2021, the plaintiffs have produced their 
evidence and the case was fixed for cross examination 
upon the PWs. On 19.01.2022, the PWs were cross 
examined 
by 
the 
learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
petitioner/defendant and the learned counsel for the 
plaintiffs closed oral as well as documentary evidence 
of the plaintiffs and the case was fixed for evidence of 
the 
defendant 
and 
at 
this 
stage, 
the 
petitioner/defendant filed the instant application for 
cross examine the PWs to the extent of custody 
petition. The reason shown by the defendant that the 
fact regarding consolidation of custody petition with 
the suit in hand was slipped from the mind of his 

2 
W.P. No.81179 of 2022. 
 
 
counsel due to which he has not cross examined the 
PWs to the extent of custody petition is not justifiable 
in the eye of law. After production of evidence by the 
plaintiffs, the defendant was given opportunity to 
cross examine the PWs and his counsel cross 
examined the PWs at reasonable length but now it is 
not in the interest of justice that the defendant again 
provided opportunity to cross examine the PWs. 
Therefore, this application moved on behalf of the 
petitioner/defendant again to cross examine the PWs 
is hereby dismissed….”  
 
3. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the 
impugned order is against facts and based 
on 
misapplication of law. He maintains that sufficient 
authority is vested in this regard in trial court under 
Section 11(3) of the Family Courts Act, 1964 (‘Act’) 
which the learned trial court has failed to exercise without 
any lawful justification. 
4. 
From perusal of copies of the evidence placed or 
record, it is manifest that the petitioner cross-examined 
PWs at length including matters relevant to the 
determination of custody of the minors.   
5. 
No doubt Section 11(3) of the Act provides that the 
parties or their counsels may further examine, cross-
examine or re-examine the witnesses, however, it has 
been held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan that 
such provisions are not meant and designed for enabling a 
party to fill up the omissions in the evidence of witness 
who has already been examined, due to negligence and 
lapse of a party, rather the purpose, the nature and the 
scope of the power available to the Court in that regard is 
to enable it to seek clarification on any issue or to have a 
doubt cleared in the statement of a witness which if left 
outstanding and without which it would be difficult for 
the Court to take a right decision. Reliance in this regard 
is placed on judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 

3 
W.P. No.81179 of 2022. 
 
 
Pakistan in the case of Muhammad Asghar v. Hussain 
Ahmad and others (PLD 2014 SC 89).   
6. 
Even otherwise, Section 13(3) of the Act must 
necessarily be construed keeping in view the principle of 
an equality of arms that lies at the heart of fair trial right 
guaranteed under Article 10A of the Constitution which 
reads as follows:  
“10A. Right to fair trial: For the determination of his 
civil rights and obligations or in any criminal charge 
against him a person shall be entitled to a fair trial and 
due process. 
 
The text of the above fundamental right has been 
partly adopted from Article 6 of the European Convention 
on Human Rights. The principle of equality of arms, 
which is a judicial construct adopted by the European 
Court of Human Rights, means giving each party a 
reasonable possibility to present its cause in such 
conditions as would not put one party in disadvantage to 
its opponent. In other words, there must be a fair balance 
between the opportunities afforded to the parties involved 
in litigation. Reliance in this regard is placed on judgment 
of this Court in the case of Amar Jeet Singh v. Sant Singh 
(2022 CLC 6).  
7. 
It has been held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan that the principles of fair trial, as guaranteed by 
Article 10A of the Constitution, are to be read as an 
integral part of every sub-constitutional legislative 
instrument that deals with determination of civil rights 
and obligations of any person. Reliance in this regard is 
placed on judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan in the case of Naveed Asghar and 2 others v. The 
State (PLD 2021 SC 600).  
8. 
Proper opportunity having already provided to the 
petitioner to cross-examine PWs, to allow another 
opportunity to the petitioner to cross-examine any witness 

4 
W.P. No.81179 of 2022. 
 
 
to fill up lacuna would be akin to place the petitioner at a 
comparative advantage over his opponent, which would 
be contrary to the principle of equality of arms and result 
in violation of Article 10A of the Constitution, therefore, 
the same could not be allowed.  
9. 
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition being 
devoid of any merit, is dismissed in limine.  
  
 
           
                                                           (RAHEEL KAMRAN) 
                          JUDGE  
 
              *Asim Shahzad* 
Approved for reporting. 
 
                 JUDGE 

