Stereo H C J D A 38 
Judgment Sheet 
LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
W.P. No. 22538 of 2022.    
            
 
Coca Cola Beverages Pakistan Ltd.   v.     Ghulam Abbas etc.  
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Date of hearing: 06.09.2023. 
 
Petitioner by: 
Mr. Umer Abdullah, Advocate. 
 
Respondents by: Mr. Muhammad Irfan Wyne, Advocate for 
respondent No.1.  
 
 
  
 
Shujaat Ali Khan, J: - Briefly put, while serving as 
Driver with the petitioner-company, disciplinary proceedings 
were initiated against respondent No.1 vide Show Cause Notice, 
dated 08.08.2012 and upon conclusion of the proceedings major 
penalty of dismissal from service was imposed against him vide 
order, dated 12.04.2013, which was assailed by him by filing 
Grievance Petition before the National Industrial Relations 
Commission (NIRC), Multan (respondent No.2), but without 
any success as the same was dismissed by the learned Single 
Member, NIRC,  vide order dated. 05.12.2019. Aggrieved of 
dismissal of the Grievance Petition filed by him, respondent 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 22538 of 2022. 
 
 
--2-- 
No.1 filed an appeal before the learned Full Bench NIRC, 
Lahore which accepted the same through order, 13.01.2022; 
hence this petition. 
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner-company submits that 
inconsistent attitude of the petitioner is evident from the fact 
that while filing reply to the Show Cause Notice he averred that 
he was accompanied by his friends on the fateful day but while 
making statement before the learned member NIRC he, while 
taking topsy-turvy, stated that when he came to the factory for 
the second time he was alone. Adds that the entire case of the 
petitioner-company is based on CCTV Footage and respondent 
No.1 having not cross-examined the witnesses of the company 
with specific reference to said CCTV Footage, the same was 
rightly accepted as primary piece of evidence in view of Article 
73 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 but the learned Full Bench 
NIRC reversed the findings of the learned Member NIRC on 
holly untenable grounds. Further adds that learned Full Bench 
NIRC could not sit as a forum of appeal against findings of the 
Inquiry Officer. Relies on Hassan Raza v. Federal Board of 
Revenue through Chairman and others (2020 SCMR 994), 
Muhammad Shamim v. Messrs Pakistan Tobacco Co. Ltd. 
Karachi and another (1975 SCMR 46), Mst. Rehana Anjum v. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 22538 of 2022. 
 
 
--3-- 
Additional Sessions Judge and 6 others (PLD 2016 LHR 570), 
(Alamgir Khalid Chughtai v. The State (PLD 2009 LHR 254), 
Akhtar Muneer v. General Tyre and Rubber Co. of Pakistan 
Ltd. through Senior Manager Industrial Relations and Notified 
Manager (2007 PLC 360), Arif Hashwani and 3 others v. 
Sadruddin Hashwani and 3 others (PLD 2007 Karachi 448) 
and United Distributors Ltd. v. Zahid Hussain Khan and 2 
others (PLD 1976 Karachi 376). 
3. 
Conversely, learned counsel representing respondent 
No.1, while defending the impugned decision rendered by 
learned Full Bench NIRC states that without proper 
authorization by way of Resolution of the Board of Directors 
(BoDs) of the petitioner-company, the persons appearing on 
behalf of the petitioner-company made their statements 
unauthorizedly, thus, their testimony could not be considered 
while deciding the matter against respondent No.1. Adds that 
since two independent charge sheets, dated 08.08.2012 & 
28.08.2012 were issued against respondent No.1 and after 
dismissal of respondent No.1 as a result of proceedings 
conducted on Show Cause Notice, dated 08.08.2012, the 
inquiry proceedings in Show Cause Notice, issued on 
28.08.2012 were dropped but while finalizing its conclusion, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 22538 of 2022. 
 
 
--4-- 
the Inquiry Officer referred to the documents produced in both 
the inquiries which fact alone is sufficient to discard the 
authenticity of the inquiry report which was made basis for 
dismissal of respondent No.1 from service. Further adds that 
when the learned Single Member NIRC declared respondent 
No.1 guilty, while amalgamating the material produced in both 
distinct inquiries, his findings were rightly reversed by learned 
Full Bench NIRC. Contends that bona-fide of respondent No.1 
is evinced from the fact that instead of approaching Police, 
being an employee of the petitioner-company, he filed 
application before high-ups of the petitioner-company but 
instead of taking any action on the said application the same 
was straight-away brushed aside while respondent No.1 was 
made scapegoat by initiating disciplinary proceedings against 
him. Further contends that since neither any Security Guard, 
who was present on duty on the fateful day nor any other 
relevant person was produced rather one Muhammad Saad 
Javed Khan appeared before the Inquiry Officer without any 
authorization, the allegation against respondent No.1 was not 
proved. Argues that Muhammad Saad Javed Khan, who 
appeared on behalf of the petitioner-company, admitted that he 
did not witness the occurrence directly rather his testimony was 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 22538 of 2022. 
 
 
--5-- 
based on hearsay, thus, his testimony was not worth reliance. 
Submits that when it was established on record that instead of 
producing CCTV Footage in evidence the same was mailed by 
some unknown person to the Inquiry Officer, the criteria laid 
down to treat any CCTV Footage as primary piece of evidence 
remained unfulfilled, hence, no reliance could be placed on 
CCTV Footage. Further submits that when Muhammad Saad 
Javed Khan was not in service when the alleged occurrence 
took place, as to how he could appear on behalf of the 
petitioner-company to vouch a fact with which he was not 
acquainted. Pleads that during cross-examination Muhammad 
Saad Javed Khan admitted that he was not confirmed as to 
whether CCTV Footage was for the entire incident rather he 
stated it could be confirmed from the computer but when the 
computer wherefrom CCTV Footage was retrieved was not 
produced in evidence it was not safe to rely upon CCTV 
Footage alone. Submits that inconsistent attitude on the part of 
the petitioner-company is established from the fact that initially 
they denied the status of respondent No.1 as active member of 
the Workers’ Union but later on during evidence admitted that 
on the day of occurrence he entered the factory in relation to a 
union matter. To conclude submits that since Inquiry Officer 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 22538 of 2022. 
 
 
--6-- 
was not produced in evidence, his findings could not be 
considered as sacrosanct to justify imposition of major penalty 
of dismissal from service against respondent No.1. 
4. 
While exercising his right of rebuttal, learned counsel for 
the petitioner-company submits that since the person (Inquiry 
Officer) who conducted the inquiry against respondent No.1 left 
the job of the petitioner-company which fact was clarified 
before the learned Single Member, NIRC, his non-production 
was inconsequential. Adds that as the CCTV Footage was 
played before respondent No.1 and he failed to discard its 
credibility, it does not lie in his mouth to impugn the 
authenticity of the same at this stage as no objection was raised 
against Exh.R/10 at the relevant time.  
5. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at 
considerable length and have also gone through the documents, 
appended with this petition, as well as the case-law cited at the 
bar. 
6. 
Firstly taking up the question as to whether the CCTV 
footage sole can be used to hold a person guilty, I am of the 
view that in the light of the provisions of the Electronic 
Transactions Ordinance, 2002, necessary amendment has been 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 22538 of 2022. 
 
 
--7-- 
made in Article 73 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 by 
declaring the CCTV footage as primary piece of evidence. It is 
also equally true that mere rendering a piece of evidence, as 
primary in nature, does not stand proof of the fact that guilt of a 
person has been proved rather for the purpose the prosecution-
complainant is bound to prove the allegation(s). Insofar as the 
case in hand is concerned, there is no denying the fact that 
reference has been made to a CCTV footage right from the 
proceedings conducted by the Inquiry Officer upto the 
proceedings before the learned Full Bench, NIRC, but it is not 
discernable from the record as to how the CCTV footage was 
brought before the Inquiry Officer. A cursory glance over the 
statement of Muhammad Saad Javed Khan, who appeared 
before the Inquiry Officer as representative of the petitioner-
company, shows that during his examination-in-chief he stated 
as under: - 
"ںیم ےن آپ وک ڑگھجے یک یس یسTV
 
"وفجیٹ لیم رک دی ےہ۔ 
The above statement is suggestive of the fact that instead of 
producing CCTV footage, he mailed the same to the Inquiry 
Officer, which does not fulfill the criteria laid down to prove 
the contents of a CCTV footage, prepared through electronic 
device.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 22538 of 2022. 
 
 
--8-- 
7. 
It is very strange to note that though Muhammad Saad 
Javed Khan claimed to have produced CCTV footage but 
during cross-examination he showed his inability to clarify as to 
whether the CCTV footage pertains to the incident took place 
inside the factory or outside the reception. He further stated that 
he was unable to state as to whether the CCTV footage 
contained the entire incident. He further stated that the said fact 
could be confirmed by the computer but the said computer 
having not been produced in evidence, it was not safe to solely 
rely upon the CCTV footage. The Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan in the case reported as Member (Administration), 
Federal Board of Revenue and others v. Mian Khan (2022 PLC 
(C.S.) 474), while dealing with the authenticity of CCTV 
footage without proving its contents through proper mechanism, 
has inter-alia held as under:- 
“5.*****Even otherwise, mere producing of CCTV 
footage as a piece of evidence without any forensic test is 
not sufficient to be relied upon unless and until 
corroborated and proved to be genuine……” 
Similar view was also taken by the Apex Court of the country 
in the case of Asfandyar and another v. Kamran and another 
(2016 SCMR 2084) by inter-alia observing as under: - 
“*****Mere producing any footage of C.C.T.V. as a 
piece of evidence in the Court is not sufficient to be relied 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 22538 of 2022. 
 
 
--9-- 
upon unless and until the same is proved to be genuine. 
In order to prove the genuiness of such footage it is 
incumbent upon the defence or prosecution to examine 
the person who prepared such footage from the C.C.T.V. 
system……”  
If the authenticity of the CCTV footage, being relied upon by 
the petitioner-company, is considered in the light of the afore-
referred judgments of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, 
there leaves no ambiguity that without fulfillment of the 
required criteria, the same could not be relied upon to hold 
respondent No.1 guilty.  
8. 
Now reverting to the merits of the case, I have observed 
that Muhammad Saad Javed Khan, while appearing before the 
Inquiry Officer, in reply to a question as to whether respondent 
No.1 was guilty or innocent, instead of making any statement in 
unequivocal words stated as under:- 
“ہی درتس یھب وہ ےتکس ںیہ طلغ یھب وہ ےتکس ںیہ
۔” 
The above statement of the representative of the petitioner-
company makes it abundantly clear that he was not sure as to 
whether respondent No.1 was guilty or not. In this backdrop, 
reliance of the Inquiry Officer on his statement was totally 
unsafe.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 22538 of 2022. 
 
 
--10-- 
9. 
It is relevant to note that according to entire case of the 
petitioner-company respondent No.1 was found involved in a 
scuffle with the security guards of the petitioner-company at the 
relevant time but non-production of any of the security guards 
to unveil the truth goes against the petitioner-company 
especially when respondent No.1 himself filed an application 
before the Human Resource Department of the petitioner-
company complaining maltreatment at the hands of the security 
guards. Moreover, the person who prepared or retrieved the 
CCTV footage from the computer has also not been produced in 
evidence, thus, it cannot be said that the petitioner-company 
proved the allegation against respondent No.1.  
10. 
It is very ironical  to note that though the proceedings 
initiated against respondent No.1 on account of absence from 
duty through Show Cause Notice, dated 28.08.2012, were 
dropped but submission of two independent reports (Exh.P-17 
and Exh.R-18) by the Inquiry Officer qua the proceedings 
started against respondent No.1 pursuant to Show Cause 
Notices, dated 08.08.2012 and 28.08.2012, stands proof of the 
fact that the inquiry proceedings against respondent No.1 were 
not conducted in a fair, transparent and impartial manner. If 
proceedings initiated against respondent No.1, pursuant to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 22538 of 2022. 
 
 
--11-- 
Show Cause Notice, dated 28.08.2012, were subsequently 
dropped by the petitioner-company as to how the Inquiry 
Officer could submit any report in that regard.  
11. 
Admittedly, one Muhammad Humair Khan appeared in 
evidence before the learned Single Member, NIRC but his 
relevancy in the matter is shrouded in mystery for the reasons 
that neither he was produced as a witness before the Inquiry 
Officer nor his relevance was shown in any proceedings. 
Moreover, non-production of the Resolution of Board of 
Directors of the petitioner-company, authorizing the person to 
appear on behalf of the petitioner-company before the learned 
Single Bench, NIRC, also dilutes the case of the petitioner-
company. 
12. 
This Court has least sympathy with a person who is 
involved in any incident qua disturbing law and order situation 
in a concern but at the same time nobody can be allowed to be 
lynched on the whims of the employer without proving the 
guilt. Though learned counsel for the petitioner-company 
addressed the Court at considerable length but has not been able 
to point out any material illegality or infirmity justifying 
interference by this Court in exercise of its constitutional 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 22538 of 2022. 
 
 
--12-- 
jurisdiction vested under Article 199 of Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.  
13. 
For what has been discussed above, I see no force in this 
petition which is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs. 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
Jamil * 
 
 
Approved for reporting.  
Judge 
 
  

