HCJDA-38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT 
RAWALPINDI BENCH, RAWALPINDI 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
EFA No. 18 of 2022 
 
Mst. Saima Naeem 
Versus 
M/s Habib Bank Ltd. and another 
 
JUDGMENT 
Date 
of 
hearing 
26.01.2023 
 
Appellant by 
 
Mr. 
Qaiser 
Nawaz 
Khan 
Niazi, 
Advocate. 
 
Respondent(s) 
by 
 
Barrister Khalique Zaman, Advocate 
for respondent No.1-Bank.  
 
Mr. Shoaib Shahid, Advocate for the 
respondent No.2. 
 
 
SULTAN TANVIR AHMAD, J:– The 
present appeal, filed under section 22 of the Financial 
Institutions (Recovery of Finances) Ordinance, 2001 
(‘FIO, 2001’), is directed against the order dated 
16.11.2022  passed by learned Judge Banking Court, 
Rawalpindi (the ‘Banking Court’), whereby objection 
petition dated 01.06.2022 filed  by the appellant has been 
dismissed. 
2. 
 
Facts, necessary for the disposal of the 
present appeal, are that respondent-bank filed suit for 
recovery under section 9 of FIO, 2001 on 11.12.2020, 

 
EFA No.18 of 2022                  (Judgment) 
 
 
 2 
which was decreed to the extent of Rs.2,087,590/- along-
with costs of suit and cost of funds vide judgment dated 
10.09.2021. The said decree stood converted into 
execution in terms of section 19(1) of FIO, 2001 and 
proceeding for its satisfaction through auction of 
mortgage property measuring 10-Marlas, Plot No.429, 
Block-D, Press Club Housing Society, Media Town 
Rawalpindi, as further detailed in the suit (the 
‘mortgaged property’), were initiated by the learned 
Banking Court. On 01.06.2022, the appellant filed 
objection petition in terms of section 19(7) of FIO, 2001 
with the averments that one-third of the mortgaged 
property belongs to the appellant as per undertaking 
dated 18.03.2017 (the ‘undertaking’) given by ex-
husband of the appellant (the ‘mortgagor’), who has 
concealed the same from the learned Banking Court, 
thus, the proceedings of auction are nullity in eyes of 
law. This objection petition was contested by the 
respondent-bank by filing reply dated 27.06.2022. The 
learned Banking Court dismissed the objection petition 
vide order dated 16.11.2022. Aggrieved from the same, 
present appeal has been filed.  
3.  
 
 Mr. Qaiser Nawaz Khan Niazi, learned 
counsel for the appellant has submitted that on the basis 
of the undertaking the appellant is owner of one-third of 
the mortgaged property and civil litigation regarding the 
title, to  the said extent, is  pending before the learned 
civil  Court, hence, the auction of the mortgaged property 
cannot  proceed further; that the learned Banking Court 
has  failed  to  consider  the  case  of  the  appellant in 
true  perspective; that  the learned Banking Court failed 
to appreciate  that the mortgagor has  defaulted in 

 
EFA No.18 of 2022                  (Judgment) 
 
 
 3 
payment of maintenance allowance to appellant and / or 
minors for which execution proceedings are pending. It is 
added by the learned counsel for the appellant that the 
impugned order and subsequent auction of the mortgaged 
property are contrary to the law as well as principles of 
natural justice.  
4.  
 
Conversely, Barrister Khalique Zaman, 
learned counsel for the respondent-bank has submitted 
that present appeal is merely an attempt to delay the 
recovery proceedings; that the respondent-bank has prior 
right of mortgage that was created on 17.07.2016 and the 
subsequent undertaking allegedly conferring ownership 
rights to the extent of one-third share in the mortgaged 
property to the appellant cannot take priority over the 
mortgage rights of the respondent-bank. Mr. Shoaib 
Shahid, learned counsel for the respondent No.2 has 
supported the arguments of the learned counsel for the 
respondent-bank, while opposing the appeal.  
5. 
 
We have heard the arguments of learned 
counsel for the parties and perused the record. 
6. 
 
As per section 58 of the Transfer of Property 
Act, 1882 mortgage is transfer of an interest in specific 
immovable property for the purposes of securing the 
payment of money advanced or to be  advanced by way 
of loan or financing, an existing or future debt or the 
performance of an engagement which may give rise to a 
pecuniary  liability. Once the mortgage is  validly created 
against a specific immoveable property, the interest of  
mortgagor in the property, to the specific extent, stands 
transferred to the mortgagee. Upon creation of mortgage, 
the 
charge 
travels 
with 
the 
property 
and 
not                

 
EFA No.18 of 2022                  (Judgment) 
 
 
 4 
with the person. Thus, if a mortgagor manages to part 
with the property or confers further interest to third party 
then the buyer or the third party will step into the shoes 
of mortgagor and he cannot claim any better title or 
rights in the property or any interest free from the charge 
of mortgage. Reference in this regard can be made to the 
cases titled “Muhammad Sadiq and Others Versus 
Muhammad Mansha and Others”(PLD 2018 Supreme 
Court 692), “Chief Land Commissioner and another 
Versus Maula Dad and Others”(1978 SCMR 264), 
“Dost Muhammad Versus House Building Finance 
Corporation”(2007 CLD 1369) and “Kanti Ram and 
Others Versus Kutubuddin Mahomed and Others”(1895) 
22 Cal 33). It will be beneficial to reproduce the 
paragraph 6 of “Muhammad Sadiq and Others” case 
(supra), whereby, the Honourable Supreme Court has 
observed as follows:- 
“In our view, law that was regarded as 
settled 125 years ago can hardly be 
disturbed today. As will be seen from the 
foregoing passages, the equity of redemption 
is simply the interest in the property that 
remains with the mortgager minus the 
interest created thereon in favour of the 
mortgagee, and it is in this interest that can 
be dealt with by the mortgager in 
accordance with law. It follows from this 
that if the mortgager enters into an 
agreement to sell subsequent to the creation 
of the mortgage, he can do so. He is then 
selling his property burdened as it is with 
the mortgage in favour of the mortgagee, 

 
EFA No.18 of 2022                  (Judgment) 
 
 
 5 
i.e., he is disposing off the equity of 
redemption. As this is permissible under 
law, it follows that if the mortgager having 
entered into such an agreement to sell does 
not abide by the same, then the buyer of the 
property is entitled to bring a suit for 
specific performance. Of course, the rights 
and interest of the mortgagee will not be 
defeated, since the buyer will step into the 
shoes of the mortgager as seller. If the 
factum of the mortgage is known to the 
buyer then he can simply join the mortgagee 
as a defendant in the suit so that if he 
succeeds in obtaining a decree for specific 
performance the rights of the various parties 
can be appropriately dealt with. However, 
even if the factum of mortgage is unknown to 
the buyer and does not come to the light 
during the course of the suit, any decree 
obtained by the buyer would still, and 
nonetheless, remain subject to the rights and 
interests of the mortgagee.”   
(Underlining is added) 
7.  
 
In case titled “Muslim Commercial Bank 
Limited Versus Syed Ataullah Shah and 2 Others”(2003 
CLD 888) a learned Division Bench of this Court has 
also held that the transferee of the previously 
encumbered property steps into shoes of the debtor and 
subsequently he cannot complain that the such property 
cannot be sold in execution of the decree. The relevant 
extract of the said judgment is as under:- 

 
EFA No.18 of 2022                  (Judgment) 
 
 
 6 
“5. There cannot be any cavil to the 
proposition that the mortgage travels with 
the property and not the person and the 
transferee of the previously encumbered 
property steps into the shoes of the debtor. 
Reference in this regard can be made to a 
case reported as Chief Land Commissioner 
v. Maula Dad and others 1978 SCMR 264. 
In the instant case, property in dispute was, 
admittedly, mortgaged with the appellant 
bank, as noted above, and the same was 
transferred in favour of the respondent 
during the subsistence of the mortgage, 
thus, as per the principle laid down in the 
aforenoted 
case 
of 
Chief 
Land 
Commissioner the respondent has stepped 
into the shoes of the judgment-debtor and, 
therefore, cannot complain or agitate that 
the mortgaged property cannot be sold by 
the appellant bank, being the mortgagee, in 
execution of the decree.” 
       (Emphasis supplied) 
8.  
 
Reverting to the relevant facts of the case, it 
is admitted before us that the mortgage by way of deposit 
of title deed(s) was effected in favour of the respondent-
bank on 17.10.2016, whereas, the appellant has asserted 
her rights on the basis of the undertaking, which was 
purportedly executed by the mortgagor about nine (9) 
months after the creation of mortgage, therefore, 
appellant cannot claim any right in the property free of 
encumbrance created through the mortgage. The rights of 
appellant, if any, in the mortgaged property on the 

 
EFA No.18 of 2022                  (Judgment) 
 
 
 7 
strength of the undertaking, is minus the interest that has 
been created by way of the mortgage in favour of the 
mortgagee / respondent-bank, for which the appellant, as 
per objection-petition, has already instituted a separate 
suit, thus, the learned Banking Court has rightly 
proceeded with the auction of the mortgaged property for 
the satisfaction of the decree passed in terms of FIO, 
2001. 
9.  
 
In the wake of above discussion, we are of 
the considered view that the order under appeal is in 
accordance with law and no interference with the same is 
required through the present appeal. Consequently the 
appeal is dismissed. No order as to costs.  
 
     
          (MIRZA VIQAS RAUF)      (SULTAN TANVIR AHMAD) 
 
 
                          JUDGE                                     JUDGE 
     
 
J.A. Hashmi/* 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved for Reporting 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                          JUDGE                                    JUDGE 
 
 
 

