                                                                                Stereo. H C J D A 38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, 
BAHAWALPUR BENCH, BAHAWALPUR   
 (JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
 
 
 
      Criminal Appeal No.32 of 2019 
Maqbool Ahmed  
 
Versus 
 
The State, etc 
 
      J U D G M E N T  
Date of hearing 
08.02.2023 
The appellant by: 
Mr. Ameer Ajam Malik, Advocate. 
The State by: 
Mr. Shahid Farid, Assistant District Public 
Prosecutor. 
The respondent by: 
Syed Dilbar Hussain Shah, Advocate with 
respondent No.2. 
 
==================================== 
 
MUHAMMAD AMJAD RAFIQ, J. Through this criminal appeal 
under Section 417 Cr.P.C., the appellant/complainant has assailed the 
judgment dated 01.12.2018 passed by the learned Magistrate 1st Class 
Bahawalpur, whereby Muhammad Ameer, respondent No.2  (hereinafter 
called the respondent) was acquitted of the charge in case FIR No.199 dated 
09.09.2014 registered under section 489-F PPC at Police Station Abbas 
Nagar, District Bahawalpur.  
2. 
Respondent had faced the trial in the aforementioned case with the 
allegation that on 29.12.2011, he came to the complainant/appellant and 
borrowed Rs.15,00,000/- from him in presence of witnesses, namely, Ghulam 
Yasin and Sajjad Ahmad;  the loan formality was documented through a 
written agreement and for the return of said amount, he issued a cheque 
No.035815 amounting to Rs.15,00,000/- drawn on National Bank of Pakistan, 
Lal Sonhara Branch, Bahawalpur for 15.08.2014, in favour of the 
appellant/complainant which was dishonoured on presentation before the 
concerned bank. 

Criminal Appeal No.32 of 2019 
 
 
 
2 
 
3. 
Trial commenced with the charge to which he pleaded not guilty; 
prosecution produced as many as nine witnesses alongwith documentary 
evidence, whereas the respondent in his statement recorded under Section 342 
Cr.P.C., denied and controverted the allegations levelled against him and 
professed his innocence.  
4. 
Heard. Record perused. 
5. 
Perusal of record evinces that as per story of prosecution, allegedly 
appellant paid Rs.15 lac to the complainant on 29.12.2011 as loan who 
promised to return the same on 15.08.2014. From 29.12.2011 till 15.04.2014, 
there is a huge gap of almost 2 ½ years for return of amount but the 
prosecution case is mum why the complainant gave this amount to the 
respondent/accused for such a long period. According to the cross 
examination of complainant, he runs his business of pesticides on cash as well 
as on credit ((اُدھار. He admitted in his cross examination that he used to give 
pesticides to the accused Muhammad Ameer on credit (اُدھار), which 
strengthen the version of respondent that he purchased fertilizer on credit and 
issued cheque to the complainant as security for payment of amount.  
6. 
According to cross examination of the appellant/ complainant, he, due 
to intervention of locals, attempted to resolve the matter and later entered into 
an agreement to sell with the respondent and his father for purchase of land 
measuring 105 acres in order to settle such loan amount but no proof with 
respect to such transaction was produced before the learned trial court so as 
to show a link of parties on the dispute of loan amount as alleged in the FIR.  
Further, Investigating Officer stated in his cross examination that no any fact 
appeared during the investigation that cheque was issued under some give and 
take ( لین دین) relation over any monetary transaction.   
7. 
Another very important aspect of the case is that according to the crime 
report, the accused came to the complainant on 29.12.2011 and the 
complainant paid Rs.15 lac to him in presence of witnesses which fact was 
documented through a written agreement and detail of which he has deposed 
during his examination-in-chief in the terms that on demand of respondent for 
giving him Rs.15 lac, he alongwith witnesses went to Bahawalpur from where 
they purchased stamp paper and after writing a loan agreement, handed over 
the amount in dispute to the respondent. Interestingly, neither that executed 

Criminal Appeal No.32 of 2019 
 
 
 
3 
 
loan agreement was exhibited during the evidence nor Sajjad Ahmed, the 
other witness of that agreement was produced in this Court which was 
necessary as per law. Learned trial court has rightly observed at the end of 
para No.22 of the judgment that:- 
 “The requirement of Article 79 of Qanoon-e- Shahadat Order 1984, is that 
to prove a document, two marginal witnesses are necessary to produce 
before the court but complainant did not produce marginal witnesses. Sale 
agreement Ex.DA which is admitted by complainant is contradictory to the 
version of complainant, in Ex.DA, complainant himself admitted the 
compromise that “when mutation attested then litigation between the 
parties came to end”. There are lot of discrepancies in evidence. Further 
complainant has miserably failed to prove the date, time and place of 
issuance of cheque as well as delivery of an amount of Rs.15,00,000/-.” 
  
8. 
The claim of the appellant was based on agreement referred above but 
said document has not been produced which is the requirement of law as per 
Article 139 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order 1984, which says that any witness 
when making statement before the Court is required to inform that whether 
such fact he is deposing about is mentioned/recorded in any document and if 
it is so, court can require production of such document because documentary 
evidence is always considered as best evidence and ‘Best Evidence Rule’ 
excludes the oral assertions. Article 139 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order,1984 is 
reproduced as under:- 
“Any witness may be asked, whilst under examination, whether any 
contract, grant or other disposition of property, as to which he is giving 
evidence, was not contained in a document, and if he say that it was, if he 
is about to make any statement as to the contents of any document, which in 
the opinion of the Court, ought to be produced, the adverse party may object 
to such evidence being given until such document is produced, or until facts 
have been proved which entitle the party who called the witness to give 
secondary evidence of it.” 
 
9. 
Every transaction where a cheque is dishonoured may not constitute an 
offence, rather three elements are required for the applicability of section             
489-F PPC (i) cheque must be issued with dishonest intention or dishonestly, 
(ii) it should be for repayment of a loan or (iii) to fulfill an obligation. 
Obligation has also a close touch with loan and above three ingredients are 
not available in this case. Reliance is placed on judgments reported as “Shah 
Jehan Khetran vs. Sh. Mureed Hussain and others” (2005 SCMR 306), 
“Naseeb Gul Vs. Amir Jan and another” (2013 P.Cr.L.J. 175), “Maj. (Rtd.) 
Javed Inayat Khan Kiyani vs. The State” (PLD 2006 Lahore 752), “Shaikh 
Muhammad Aamir and another vs. Government of Sindh through Home 

Criminal Appeal No.32 of 2019 
 
 
 
4 
 
Secretary and 4 others” (PLD 2013 Sindh 488), “Jalaluddin vs. Dileep and 
another” (2018 YLR 697), “Madawa through President vs. I.G.P. and 15 
others” (PLD 2013 Lahore 442), “Muhammad Saleem vs. The State” (2011 
P.Cr.L.J 428), “Mehmood Khan vs. Sohail Khan and another” (2017 
P.Cr.L.J. 1305), “Usman Ali vs. ASJ/JOP and 4 others” (2016 P.Cr.L.J. 
323), and “Muhammad Ayub vs. Rana Abdul Rehman and another” (2006 
YLR 1852). 
10. 
It is trite that to constitute an offence under this section dishonesty on 
the part of the payer is a condition precedent in issuance of a cheque towards 
repayment of loan or to fulfill an obligation. Two terms, obligation and 
dishonesty are required to be thrashed for its reference to the situation of this 
case. The popular meaning of the term “obligation” is a duty to do or not to 
do something. In its legal sense, obligation is a civil law concept. An 
obligation can be created voluntarily, such as one arising from a contract, 
quasi-contract, or unilateral promise. An obligation can also be created 
involuntarily, such as an obligation arising from torts or a statute. An 
obligation binds together two or more determinate persons. Therefore, the 
legal meaning of an obligation does not only denote a duty, but also denotes 
a correlative right; one party has an obligation means another party has a 
correlative right. The person or entity who was liable for the obligation is 
called obligor; the person or entity who holds the correlative right to an 
obligation is called obligee. Some common uses of the term "obligation" in a 
legal sense include:- 
i. 
The term "contractual obligation" refers to the duty to pay or 
perform some certain acts created by a contract or an agreement. 
 
ii. 
"Conditional obligation" means the duty to pay or perform 
certain acts depending on the happening of an event. 
 
iii. 
"Current obligation" means the obligation that is currently 
enforceable. 
 
iv. 
"Heritable obligation" means a legal obligation or the related 
right is not ended by the death of the person who was liable for 
the obligation or who held the right. The heritable 
obligation stipulates that an obligation is heritable when its 
performance may be enforced by a successor of the obligee or 
against a successor of the obligor. 

Criminal Appeal No.32 of 2019 
 
 
 
5 
 
The legal sense of obligation from early Roman law claims that obligations 
are the bond of vinculum juris, or legal necessity, between at least two 
individuals or parties. In the original sense, the idea of obligation referred only 
to the responsibility to pay any money outlined in the terms of specific written 
documents. Obligation is the moral or legal duty that requires an individual to 
perform, as well as the potential penalties for the failure to perform. An 
obligation is also a duty to do what is imposed by a contract, promise, or law.  
 
11.      Dishonesty means a state of mind where an act is committed by a 
person with the intention of causing wrongful gain for himself, herself or 
another, or of causing wrongful loss to any other person. Dishonesty is an 
acquisitive offence but a crucial question is palpitated as to whether 
dishonesty is a “state of  mind” or it is a “course of action” No law in 
Pakistan defines this difference so far as told to the court; therefore, seeking 
guidance from UK law which says that there were two views of what 
constituted dishonesty in English law. The first contention was that the 
definition of dishonesty (such as those within the Theft Act 1968) described 
a course of action, whereas the second contention was that the definition 
described a state of mind. A clear test within the criminal law emerged 
from R v Ghosh [1982] QB 1053. The Court of Appeal held that dishonesty 
is an element of mens rea, clearly referring to a state of mind, and that overall, 
the test that must be applied is hybrid, but with a subjective bias which "looks 
into the mind" of the person concerned and establishes what he was thinking. 
The test is two-stage: 
• "Were the person's actions honest according to the standards of 
reasonable and honest people?" If a jury decides that they were, 
then the defendant's claim to be honest will be credible. But, if 
the court decides that the actions were dishonest, the further 
question is: 
• “Did the person concerned believe that what he did was dishonest 
at the time?” 
But this decision was criticized, and over-ruled, by the UK Supreme Court in 
the case of Ivey v Genting Casinos (UK) Ltd t/a Crockfords [2017] UKSC 
67. The position as a result is that the court must form a view of what the 
defendant's belief was of the relevant facts. Hence the test for dishonesty 

Criminal Appeal No.32 of 2019 
 
 
 
6 
 
was subjective and objective. An observation upon R v Ghosh was given in 
the above judgment in following terms; 
“54.    A significant refinement to the test for dishonesty was introduced 
by R v Ghosh [1982] QB 1053. Since then, in criminal cases, the judge 
has been required to direct the jury, if the point arises, to apply a two-
stage test. Firstly, it must ask whether in its judgment the conduct 
complained of was dishonest by the lay objective standards of ordinary 
reasonable and honest people. If the answer is no, that disposes of the 
case in favour of the defendant. But if the answer is yes, it must ask, 
secondly, whether the defendant must have realised that ordinary honest 
people would so regard his behaviour, and he is to be convicted only if 
the answer to that second question is yes.” 
Giving it a final shape, it was formulated as under; 
1. 
Was the act one that an ordinary decent person (normally 
considered to be the ubiquitous 'man on the Clapham omnibus') 
would consider to be dishonest (the objective test)? If so: 
2.    Must the accused have realized that what he was doing was, by 
those standards, dishonest (the subjective test)? [This part of the 
test was overruled by the Supreme Court in the case of  Ivey v 
Genting Casinos (UK) Ltd t/a Crockfords [2017] UKSC 67]  
 
It is not essential for a person to admit that they acted in a way that they knew 
to be dishonest; it was probably enough that they knew others would think 
their behaviour was dishonest, or that they thought that what they were doing 
was wrong. 
12.   In Ivey v Genting Casinos (UK) Ltd t/a Crockfords [2017] UKSC 67] 
a paragraph referred is worth mentioning here to further dilate upon the 
definition; 
11“Although a dishonest state of mind is a subjective mental state, the 
standard by which the law determines whether it is dishonest is 
objective. If by ordinary standards a defendant’s mental state would 
be characterised as dishonest, it is irrelevant that the defendant judges 
by different standards. The Court of Appeal held this to be a correct 
state of the law and their Lordships agree.” 
Dishonestly is also an essential element of cheating therefore, as concept it 
cannot be defined but can be perceived from the acts or result of acts. 
Dishonestly and fraudulently, two concepts though intermingled but with 
distinct meaning and connotation have rightly taken their space in Ivey v 
Genting Casinos (UK) Ltd t/a Crockfords [2017] UKSC 67] as under; 

Criminal Appeal No.32 of 2019 
 
 
 
7 
 
“48.  Where it applies as an element of a criminal charge, dishonesty 
is by no means a defined concept. On the contrary, like the elephant, 
it is characterised more by recognition when encountered than by 
definition. Dishonesty is not a matter of law, but a jury question of 
fact and standards. Except to the limited extent that section 2 of the 
Theft Act 1968 requires otherwise, judges do not, and must not, 
attempt to define it: R v Feely [1973] QB 530. In this it differs 
strikingly from the expression “fraudulently”, which it largely 
replaced, for the judge did define whether a state of mind, once 
ascertained as a matter of fact, was or was not fraudulent: R v 
Williams [1953] 1 QB 660. Accordingly, dishonesty cannot be 
regarded as a concept which would bring to the assessment of 
behaviour a clarity or certainty which would be lacking if the jury 
were left to say whether the behaviour under examination amounted 
to cheating or did not.”  
 
It has been referred in above case that The Criminal Law Revision Committee, 
in its eighth report, advised the substitution of the word “dishonestly”, on the 
grounds that “fraudulently” had become technical and its meaning had 
departed somewhat from the ordinary understanding of lay people. It 
recommended that “dishonestly” would be more easily understood by lay fact-
finders and the public generally. At para 39 the Committee advised that:   
“‘Dishonestly’ seems to us a better word than ‘fraudulently’. The 
question ‘Was this dishonest?’ is easier for a jury to answer than 
the question ‘Was this fraudulent?’. ‘Dishonesty’ is something 
which laymen can easily recognize when they see it, whereas 
‘fraud’ may seem to involve technicalities which have to be 
explained by a lawyer.” 
 
13.    Section 489-F PPC finds mentioned the word ‘dishonestly’ and not the 
‘fraudulently’ which is somewhat different concept yet both sometime are 
intermingled. Section 24 & 25 of PPC defines the terms as under; 
 24. “Dishonestly”. 
 
Whoever does anything with the intention of causing wrongful gain 
to one person or wrongful loss to another person, is said to do that 
thing "dishonestly". 
 
   
   25. “Fraudulently”. 
A person is said to do a thing fraudulently if he does that thing with 
intent to defraud but not otherwise. 
 
Section 23 of PPC further defines that "Wrongful gain" is gain by unlawful 
means of property to which the person gaining is not legally entitled. 
Wrongful loss" is the loss by unlawful means of property to which the person 
losing it is legally entitled. A person is said to gain wrongfully when such 
person retains wrongfully, as well as when such person acquires wrongfully. 

Criminal Appeal No.32 of 2019 
 
 
 
8 
 
A person is said to lose wrongfully when such person is wrongfully kept out 
of any property, as well as when such person is wrongfully deprived of 
property.  
‘Fraudulently’ on the other side means an intention to defraud and Indian 
Supreme Court has defined this term in a case reported as “Dr. Vimla v. The Delhi 
Administration” (AIR 1963 SC 1572) as under; 
 
“The word "defraud" includes an element of deceit. Deceit is not an 
ingredient of the definition of the word "dishonestly" while it is an 
important ingredient of the definition of the word "fraudulently". The 
former involves a pecuniary or economic gain or loss while the latter 
by construction excludes that element. Further, the juxtaposition of the 
two expressions "dishonestly" and "fraudulently" used in the various 
sections of the Code indicates their close affinity and therefore the 
definition of one may give colour to the other. To illustrate, in the 
definition of "dishonestly", wrongful gain or wrongful loss is the 
necessary ingredient. Both need not exist; one would be enough. So too, 
if the expression "fraudulently" were to be held to involve the element 
of injury to the person or persons deceived, it would be reasonable to 
assume that the injury should be something other than pecuniary or 
economic loss. Though almost always an advantage to one causes loss 
to another and vice crease, it need not necessarily be so. Should we hold 
that the concept of "fraud" would include not only deceit but also some 
injury to the person deceived, it would be appropriate to hold by 
analogy drawn from the definition of "dishonestly" that to satisfy the 
definition of "fraudulently" it would be enough if there was a non-
economic advantage to the deceiver or a non-economic loss to h 
deceived. Both need not co-exist.” 
 
In the same judgment Supreme Court of India has referred a judgment of The 
Calcutta High Court which dealt with this question in Surendra Nath Ghose 
v. Emperor [(I) (I9II) I.L.R. 38 Cal. 75, 89-90.]. wherein Mookerjee J. defined 
the words "intention to defraud" as under; 
 
"The expression, `intent to defraud', implies conduct coupled with 
intention to deceive and thereby to injure: in other words, `defraud' 
involves two conceptions, namely, deceit and injury to the person 
deceived, that is, infringement of some legal right possessed by him, but 
not necessarily deprivation of property." 
 
A difference in two terms has also been defined by this court in a reported 
case of Criminal Appeal No. 51224/17 “Amir Hayat Vs The State etc.” (2022 
LHC 4393) like as under; 
“Above definition shows that a doer of a dishonest act may not have any 
interest in causing loss to any rightful claimant yet does the act for his 
own interest either to usurp the property or to alienate it in 
consideration of bribe given to him and the consequences of his act 
cause either wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any party in interest. 
Whereas fraudulent act contains malice, grudge, deception against a 
particular person with a targeted mind to ruin him or to deprive him 

Criminal Appeal No.32 of 2019 
 
 
 
9 
 
from the property and for that end property is obtained from him 
through deception under grab or with temptation like increased value 
of the property. Example of above difference could be like that if a 
property is handed over by a person at his own to any other without 
any offer from any corner with the request to keep it as trust or use it 
under a contract between them, if it is misappropriated by the trustee, 
the matter is of criminal breach of trust but if a person persuades other 
with alluring offers to hand over the property for an increased benefit, 
misappropriation of such property shall be labelled as fraudulent 
which is not the subject matter of criminal breach of trust. Element of 
fraud is more serious and its proof requires evidence of precise and 
clear intention which is difficult to collect in ordinary circumstances 
unless ample material for deduction is brought on record that is the 
reason even in definition of cheating u/s 415 PPC both the words 
‘dishonestly’ and ‘fraudulently’ has been used.” 
 
 
From the above expression it is clear that two terms stand a part therefore, it 
is essential to prove dishonesty in issuing of cheque for the applicability of 
section 489-F PPC. In a case reported as “(CoL.) F.S. WAHID-UD-DIN Versus THE 
CROWN” (PLD 1956 (W.P.) Karachi 489) while referring definition of 
Criminal breach of trust (Section 405 PPC) wherein dishonestly is an essential 
ingredient, honourable court has held that “in the absence of any allegation 
of dishonesty or allegations which necessarily lead to an inference of 
dishonesty as defined in section 24 and 23 PPC no charge under section 409 
PPC can be spelled out.”   
14.    The above discussion is concluded in the terms that dishonesty is an 
acquisitive offence and in our law is a ‘state of mind’ (mens rea) and the fact 
that doer of an act knew of his act being dishonest (subjective test) is to be 
determined by the court from ‘course of action’ adopted for such act (objective 
test), depending upon the circumstances and evidence of the parties; therefore, 
it rests upon the Court to consider under which circumstances, the cheque was 
issued and what was the intention of the person issuing it but here in this case 
the prosecution has not only failed to prove the dishonesty on the part of the 
accused in issuance of cheque for repayment of a loan or fulfillment of any 
obligation but also failed to prove the transaction between the parties for 
which cheque was issued which facts adversely affect the prosecution case. 
Reliance is placed on cases reported as “Malik SAFDAR ALI Versus Syed 
KHALID ALI and two others” (PLD 2012 Sindh 464), “RASHID AHMED 
Versus MUHAMMAD MASOOD and another” (2020 P Cr.L J 1126), 
“MUHAMMAD IQBAL Versus STATION HOUSE OFFICER and 2 others” 

Criminal Appeal No.32 of 2019 
 
 
 
10 
 
(2009 CLD 1149), “MUZAFFAR AHMAD Versus The STATE AND 2 others” 
(2021 P Crl. L J 1393). 
 
15. 
  After going through the entire record, I have not seen any 
misapplication of judicious mind in appreciation of prosecution evidence qua 
acquittal of the respondent. In this respect, reliance is placed on cases reported 
as “MUHAMMAD SALEEM Versus MUHAMMAD AZAN and another” (2011 
SCMR 474), “Haji AMANULLAH versus MUNIR AHMED and others” (2010 
SCMR 222) and “NAWAZUL HAQ CHOWHAN versus THE STATE and 
others” (2003 SCMR 1597). The Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the 
case reported “MUHAMMAD AZAM and others Vs THE STATE” (2009 
SCMR 1232) while laying down the criteria for interference in a judgment of 
acquittal, held that: - 
 “Findings of Court acquitting the accused must be proved to be perverse, 
arbitrary, 
whimsical, 
unreasonable, 
fake, 
concocted, 
artificial, 
ridiculous, shocking, false, based on misreading of material evidence, on 
inadmissible evidence, on a view not possible to gather from the evidence 
on the record, highly conjectural, or based on surmises and unwarranted 
in law. Acquitted accused is credited with two advantages, one his 
innocence at the pre-trial stage and the other earned by him after his 
acquittal by a Court of competent jurisdiction.” 
 
  
16. 
   For what has been discussed above, the learned trial court, taking stock 
of all above factors has rightly passed the impugned judgment which appears to 
be fully justified in the facts and circumstances of the instant case. The instant 
appeal is, therefore, dismissed. Record of learned trial court be sent back 
immediately and case property, if any be disposed in accordance with law. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (Muhammad Amjad Rafiq) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         Judge  
                         Jamshaid* 
 
 
 
 
      APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
       JUDGE 
 
 
 
 

