.Form No: HCJD/C-121 
 
 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,  
 
BAHAWALPUR BENCH, BAHAWALPUR 
     (JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT) 
  
 
 
 
Case No. 
Criminal Revision No.173 of 2022 
 
Muhammad Hanif 
Versus  
The State etc. 
 
Sr.No.of order/ 
Proceedings 
Date of order/ 
Proceedings 
Order with signatures of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, where 
necessary. 
 
 
 
10.01.2023 
Mr. Muhammad Mushtaq Warraich, Advocate for the 
petitioner.  
Jam Muhammad Tariq, Deputy Prosecutor General 
with Mustafa, ASI. 
Complainant in person.  
 
Muhammad Hanif, petitioner being brother of Muhammad 
Ibrahim accused of case FIR No.531/2021 dated 27.11.2021 under 
Section 295-B PPC registered at Police Station Galey Wal, District 
Lodhran through this revision petition has challenged the order dated 
16.09.2022 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Lodhran 
whereby his application filed u/s 466 of Cr.P.C. for bail of his insane 
bother was rejected. 
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner states that despite the fact that 
Medical Board has declared Muhammad Ibrahim accused as insane and 
court while partly accepting this report though has not proceeded into 
the trial and order for fresh medical report yet did not release the 
accused on bail disregarding the provisions of section 466 Cr. P.C. On 
the other hand learned Deputy Prosecutor General states that as 
Schizophrenia is not a permanent mental disorder, therefore, learned 
trial court has rightly rejected the application while relying on case 
reported as “Mst. SAFIA BANO Versus HOME DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT 
OF PUNJAB and others” (PLD 2017 Supreme Court 18).  
                                3. 
Heard. Record perused. 
                             4. 
The foremost consideration by the learned trial court for 
declining the request for bail was the observation in judgment of 

Criminal Revision No.173/2022.                                                                 Page 2 
 
Honourable Supreme Court cited above; therefore, before proceeding 
further such observation is reproduced as under:- 
“Schizophrenia, therefore, was a recoverable disease, which, in all 
the cases, did not fall within the definition of "mental disorder" as 
defined in the Mental Health Ordinance, 2001.” 
 
But such observation was given in the case at the stage when accused 
after conviction has exhausted all his remedies up to apex Court; it was 
therefore, noted as under:-  
“That rules relating to mental sickness could not be used to delay the 
execution of death sentence awarded to the convict, which had 
attained finality up to the level of the Supreme Court, and when mercy 
petition of convict had already been dismissed by the President.” 
Even otherwise cited judgment has been reviewed by a larger Bench of 
five members through case reported as Mst. SAFIA BANO and another 
Versus HOME DEPARTMENT GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB 
through Secretary and others” (PLD 2021 Supreme Court 488).   
5. 
Principle of fair trial and due process having its roots in our 
Constitutional framework set in Article 10-A is when juxtaposed to the 
provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (the Code) for trial of 
an accused on a criminal charge it requires not only the physical 
presence of accused as per Section 353 of the Code barring some 
exceptional situations like under Section 205 or 540-A of the Code but 
his mental presence is also essential otherwise trial would be a farce. 
The law requires that if any person is found as of unsound mind during 
his trial, case shall not proceed further until he is declared fit by the 
court concerned after conducting a thorough inquiry. What process is 
to be adopted to attend such legal disability, the relevant section of the 
Code is reproduced for reference:- 
“465. Procedure in case of person sent for trial before Court of 
Session or High Court being lunatic: (1) If any person before a 
Court of Session or a High Court appears to the Court at his trial 
to be of unsound mind and consequently incapable of making his 
defence, the Court shall, in the first instance, try the fact of such 
unsoundness and incapacity, and if the Court is satisfied of the 
fact, it shall record a finding to that effect and shall postpone 
further proceedings in the case.  
(2) The trial of the fact of the unsoundness of mind and incapacity 
of the accused shall be deemed to be part of his trial before the 
Court.” 
 

Criminal Revision No.173/2022.                                                                 Page 3 
 
The section requires the court to try first the fact of unsoundness and 
incapacity of accused to make his defence which means that ‘a trial 
within a trial’ would be conducted in order to ensure that accused 
understand the proceedings of trial against him so as to make the 
evidence admissible at trial. Such trial obviously includes the 
examination of witnesses produced on behalf of accused, report of a 
medical board including examination of doctors/expert and cross 
examination by the prosecution or the complainant on such witnesses 
and expert, and recording of any other evidence which the court 
considers necessary. After recording of such evidence court shall hear 
the parties and either pass an order as to the fact that accused is of 
unsound mind and incapable to make his defence or otherwise. As per 
Section 465(2) of the Code such record shall be part of his main trial 
before the court.  
6. 
The concept of trial within a trial is known as “voir dire” 
pronounced as “vwa dear” a recognized term to try a fact within the 
trial. The meaning of voir dire is ‘to speak the truth’. In a trial there are 
certain primary facts which are must to be proved as condition 
precedent to the admissibility of certain items of evidence. For 
example, (i) where the prosecution proposes to adduce evidence of a 
confession made by the accused and defence object to its admissibility 
on the grounds that it was or may have been obtained by oppression of 
the accused or in consequence of anything said or done which likely, in 
circumstances, to render unreliable any confession which might be 
made by him in consequence thereof, the court shall not allow the 
confession to be admitted except in so far as the prosecution proves to 
the court that confession was not obtained by such means; (ii) proof of 
a due search for the original of a lost document on the contents of which 
a party seeks to rely, a condition precedent to the admissibility of a copy 
of that document; (iii) if a party seeks to adduce a video clip or audio 
recording in the evidence, the question of its being genuine or non-
tempered shall be decided first before its admission to evidence; (iv) 
similarly, it may become necessary to show that a person is competent 
to give evidence as a witness or that a witness is privileged from 
answering a particular question. Questions of above kind are also matter 

Criminal Revision No.173/2022.                                                                 Page 4 
 
of law for the judge. The preliminary facts may be agreed or assumed, 
but where they are in dispute, it is for the judge to hear evidence and 
adjudicate upon them. The witnesses give their evidence on a special 
form of oath knowns as a voir dire. The hearing before the judge is 
called hearing on voir dire or ‘a trial within a trial’. 
             All questions referred above are question of law in our law of 
evidence except confession made to a police officer or during custody 
of police as per Articles 38 & 39 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, 
however there is one exception for a confession made during police 
custody in cases triable under Anti-terrorism Act, 1997 (see section           
21-H of said Act), therefore, voir dire process can be initiated in above 
situations. Likewise, for trying a fact of unsoundness of mind, a voir 
dire is to be preferred.      
7. 
If after trying the fact of unsoundness of the accused, court comes 
to the conclusion that accused is of unsound mind, the court shall 
postpone further proceedings in the case and proceed to release the 
accused on bail or make an order that the accused to be detained in safe 
custody in such place and manner as it may think fit. Following section 
of the code deals with the situation:- 
“466. Release of lunatic pending investigation or trial: (1) 
Whenever an accused person is found to of unsound mind and 
incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate or Court, as the 
case may be, whether the case is one in which bail may be taken or 
not, may release him on sufficient security being given that he shall 
be properly taken care of and shall be prevented from doing injury 
to himself or to any other person, and for his appearance when 
required before the Magistrate or Court or such officer as the 
Magistrate or Court appoints in this behalf. 
(2) Custody of lunatic: If the case is one in which, in the opinion 
of the Magistrate or Court, bail should not be taken, or if sufficient 
security is not given, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, 
shall, order the accused to be detained in safe custody in such place 
and manner as he or it may think fit, and shall report the action 
taken to the provincial Government:”  
The procedure required under sections 465 & 466 of the code is 
mandatory which cannot be circumvented in any circumstances; reliance 
in this respect is on cases reported as “NOOR JEHAN Versus THE STATE” 
(PLD 1980 Peshawar 103); “KHAN BAIG Versus THE STATE” (PLD 1984 
Lahore 434); “SALIM UDDIN Versus THE STATE” (PLD 1985 Karachi 

Criminal Revision No.173/2022.                                                                 Page 5 
 
594); “SAID RASOOL 
Versus MUHAMMAD FAZIL and another”           
(1990 P Cr.L J 210). 
8.        There are two situations which are met in chapter XXXIV of the 
Code for trial of an accused of unsound mind. Law requires that if an 
accused is unable to defend himself during trial due to unsoundness of 
mind, he shall request the court to process his case u/s 465 of the Code; 
whereas if he is fit to face the trial but claims that at the time of 
commission of offence, he was unsound mind, he would be taken care 
of within the requirement of section 469 of the Code which runs as 
under:- 
“469. When accused appears to have been insane: When the accused 
appears to be of sound mind at the time of Inquiry or trial, and the 
Magistrate or Court is satisfied from the evidence given before him 
that there is reason to believe that the accused committed the act 
which if he had been of sound mind, would have been an offence, and 
that he was. at the time when the act was committed, by reason of 
unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the fact or 
that it was wrong or contrary to law, the Magistrate or Court shall 
proceed with the case.”   
 
The above section requires that trial would proceed in a normal course 
led through prosecution evidence first including evidence of mental 
health of accused at the time of commission of offence and circumstantial 
evidence that spurs out from the mode and manner of committing such 
offence. Sanity is a rebuttable presumption, therefore, once the 
prosecution completes its evidence, the accused can lead the evidence to 
rebut the prosecution evidence as well as adducing anything favouring or 
supporting his plea. The law permits to claim such disability for 
diminished responsibility which is known as M’Naughton Rule, 
sometimes spelled McNaghten, the first legal test for criminal insanity. 
The rules so formulated as “M'Naghten's Case 1843 10 C & F 200” 
have been a standard test for criminal liability in relation to mentally 
disordered defendants in common law jurisdictions ever since, with 
some minor adjustments. The test originated in 1843 in England during 
the case against Daniel M’Naghten who shot and killed the secretary to 
the Prime Minister, Edward Drummond, believing he was the Prime 
Minister of UK, Robert Peel. During his arrest, M’Naghten claimed he 
needed to murder the Prime Minister because “the tories” were 
conspiring against him and wished to murder him. At trial, M’Naghten’s 

Criminal Revision No.173/2022.                                                                 Page 6 
 
counsel put forth a defence of insanity, offering expert testimony and 
other evidence in support of this. Following instructions from the judge, 
the jury’s verdict was not guilty “by reason of insanity” and M’Naghten 
spent the rest of his life in a mental institution. After public outrage 
following M’Naghten’s verdict, a stricter test for criminal insanity was 
articulated. Under this M’Naghten test, all defendants are presumed to be 
sane unless they can prove that at the time of committing the criminal 
act, the defendant’s state of mind caused them to (1) not know what they 
were doing when they committed said act, or (2) that they knew what 
they were doing, but did not know that it was wrong. A common example 
for the second prong is if a person is acting on orders from “God.” 
9.          The M’Naughton Rule is incorporated in section 84 of Pakistan 
Penal Code, 1860 (PPC) falling in chapter dealing with general 
exceptions; Section 84 is reflected below:- 
“84. Act of a person of unsound mind: Nothing is an offence which 
is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of 
unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, 
or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.”  
To prove inanity the accused would adduce evidence as required by 
Article 121 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 which shall include 
proceedings conducted u/s 465 of the Code in earlier round of trial, and 
burden to prove that plea would be on the accused as per principles of 
evidence required for proving any other general exception referred in 
PPC read with Article 121 ibid. Reliance in this respect is on cases 
reported as “KHIZAR HAYAT Versus THE STATE” (2006 SCMR 1755); 
“THE STATE Versus BALAHARI DAS SUTRADHAR” (PLD 1962 Dacca 
467); “LAL KHAN Versus CROWN” (PLD 1952 Lahore 502); “GHULAM 
YOUSAF Versus THE CROWN” (PLD 1953 Lahore 213). The Honourable 
supreme court in case reported as “Mst. SAFIA BANO and another 
Versus HOME DEPARTMENT GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB through 
Secretary and others” (PLD 2021 Supreme Court 488) in para-43 has 
held that onus to prove such plea is on the accused, however, while 
proving such plea, the accused may get benefit from any material, oral 
or documentary, produced/relied upon by the prosecution. 
10. 
If the accused succeeded to prove the fact of his unsoundness of 
mind the trial court would proceed to acquit the accused and shall pass 

Criminal Revision No.173/2022.                                                                 Page 7 
 
judgment in the terms keeping in view the requirement of following 
section:- 
“470. Judgment of acquittal on ground of lunacy: Whenever any 
person is acquitted upon the ground that, at the time at which he is 
alleged to have committed an offence he was, by reason of 
unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the act 
alleged as constituting the offence, or that it was wrong or contrary 
to law, the finding shall state specifically whether he committed the 
act or not.” 
 
Trial court is required to give specific finding as to whether accused 
committed the offence charged or not, and then would speak the fact 
about two aspects in either of the way it was found in the evidence, i.e., 
accused did not know that he was committing an offence, or alleged act 
was wrong or contrary to law. If it is concluded that accused has not 
committed the offence, he would be set at liberty but when an accused 
earns acquittal on the ground of insanity, he would still be kept or 
detained in safe custody as required under following section of the Code:- 
“471 Person acquitted on such ground to be detained in safe 
custody: (1) Whenever the finding states that the accused 
person/committed the act alleged, the Magistrate or Court before 
whom, or which the trial has been held, shall, if such act would but 
for the incapacity, found, have constituted an offence, order such 
person to be detained in safe Custody in such place and manner as 
the Magistrate or Court thinks fit, and shall report the action taken 
to the Provincial Government; 
Provided that no order for the detention of the accused in a lunatic 
asylum shall be made otherwise than in accordance with such rules 
as the Provincial Government may have made under the Lunacy 
Act, 1912.  
(2) Power of Provincial Government to relieve Inspector-General 
of certain functions: The Provincial Government may empower 
the officer incharge of the jail in which a person is confined under 
the provisions of Section 466 or this section, to discharge all or any 
of the functions of the Inspector General of Prisons under Section 
473 or Section 474.” 
 
If the accused is later declared fit to be released, the procedure laid down 
u/ss 474 & 475 of the Code shall follow as may be practicable.  
11. 
The diminished criminal liability due to insanity can be adjudged 
while relying on legal precedents developed on different set of facts and 
mania determined by the medical experts; In “R v Arnold (1724) 16 How 
St. Tr. 765”, the test for insanity was expressed in the following terms: 

Criminal Revision No.173/2022.                                                                 Page 8 
 
Whether the accused is totally deprived of his 
understanding and memory and knew what he was doing 
"no more than a wild beast or a brute, or an infant. 
 
The next major advance occurred in “Hadfield's Trial 1800 27 How St. 
Tr. 1281” in which the court decided that a crime committed under some 
delusion would be excused only if it would have been excusable had the 
delusion been true. This would deal with the situation, for example, when 
the accused imagines he is cutting through a loaf of bread, whereas in 
fact he is cutting through a person's neck. Each jurisdiction may have its 
own standards of the insanity defence. More than one standard can be 
applied to any case based on multiple jurisdictions. 
            Whether a particular condition amounts to a disease of the mind 
within the Rules is not a medical but a legal question to be decided in 
accordance with the ordinary rules of interpretation. It seems that any 
disease which produces a malfunctioning of the mind is a disease of the 
mind and need not be a disease of the brain itself. The term has been held 
to cover numerous conditions: 
• 
In “R v Kemp [1957] 1 QB 399” arteriosclerosis or a hardening of 
the arteries caused loss of control during which the defendant attacked 
his wife with a hammer. This was an internal condition and a disease of 
the mind. 
 
• 
In “R v Sullivan [1984] AC 156” during an epileptic episode, the 
defendant caused grievous bodily harm: epilepsy was an internal 
condition and a disease of the mind, and the fact that the state was 
transitory was irrelevant. 
 
• 
In “R v Quick; R v Paddison [1973] QB 910” the defendant 
committed an assault while in a state of hypoglycemia caused by the 
insulin he had taken, the alcohol he had consumed and not eating 
properly. It was ruled that the judge should have left the defence of 
automatism open to him, so his conviction was quashed (he had pleaded 
guilty rather than not guilty by reason of insanity). This was where the 
internal/external divide doctrine was first expressed, probably due to 
judicial reluctance to hospitalize someone for a condition that could be 
cured by a sugar lump. It is doubtful that a jury would have accepted a 
defence of automatism, but nonetheless the issue should have been left to 
them. 
 
• 
In “R v Hennessy [1989] 1 WLR 287” a diabetic stole a car and 
drove it while suffering from a mild attack of hyperglycemia caused by 
stress and a failure to take his insulin. Lane LCJ said at 294 
 
In our judgment, stress, anxiety and depression can no doubt be 
the result of the operation of external factors, but they are not, it 
seems to us, in themselves separately or together external factors 

Criminal Revision No.173/2022.                                                                 Page 9 
 
of the kind capable in law of causing or contributing to a state of 
automatism. They constitute a state of mind which is prone to 
recur. They lack the feature of novelty or accident, which is the 
basis of the distinction drawn by Lord Diplock in R v 
Sullivan 1984 AC 156, 172. It is contrary to the observations of 
Devlin J., to which we have just referred in Hill v Baxter (1958) 
1 QB 277, 285. It does not, in our judgment, come within the 
scope of the exception of some external physical factor such as a 
blow on the head or the administration of an anesthetic. 
• 
In “Bratty v Attorney-General for Northern Ireland [1963] AC 
386” Lord Denning observed obiter that a crime committed while 
sleepwalking would appear to him to be one committed as an automaton. 
However, the ruling in R v Sullivan that diseases of the mind need have 
no permanence led many academics to suggest that sleepwalkers might 
well be found to be suffering from a disease of the mind with internal 
causes unless there was clear evidence of an external causal factor. 
 
• 
In “R v Burgess [1991] 2 QB 92” the Court of Appeal ruled that the defendant, 
who wounded a woman by hitting her with a video recorder while sleepwalking, 
was insane under the M'Naghten Rules. Lord Lane said, "We accept that sleep is a 
normal condition, but the evidence in the instant case indicates that sleepwalking, 
and particularly violence in sleep, is not normal." 
 
12. 
Coming back to the case in hand; report of medical board 
obtained by the order of learned trial court about condition of accused 
speaks as under:- 
“The standing medical board assembled and revealed the Psychiatric 
opinion vide No. Psy/24 dated 11-03-2022 of accused Muhammad 
Ibrahim S/O Abdul Hameed, his remarks of identification are:- 
1).  Mole of left side of neck         2. Mole on right side of neck. 
Prisoner Muhammad Ibrahim S/O Abdul Hameed, was admitted 
through OPD with registration No.1206028-144-13 from 08-03-
2022 to 10-03-2022. 
During his stay in our ward he was kept under observation and his 
mental state examination was performed. He is a known psychiatric 
patient for the last many years. On mental state examination patient 
has poor personal hygiene, irrelevant talk, loosening of association, 
disorganized behavior and lack of insight. He is diagnosed as a case 
Schizophrenia. Hence, he is insane.    
Therefore, the medical board unanimously agreed with the above 
opinion.” 
 
Corresponding to such report it was incumbent upon the learned trial court 
to advert to the statutory provision cited above which cater to the 
requirement of situation so as to give effect to the law of land enacted to 
protect the rights of individuals and court should have first tried the fact 
of unsoundness before passing of impugned order which has not been 
done in this case. Law requires that after completing the process, finding 
the accused as of unsound mind, the court if does not think proper to grant 

Criminal Revision No.173/2022.                                                                 Page 10 
 
bail to the accused under section 466(1) of the Code, it shall pass order 
for safe custody of accused as per section 466(2) of the Code; reliance is 
on cases reported as “MUHAMMAD NASEEM versus THE STATE” 
(1982 SCMR 754); “MUHAMMAD SAEED WASEER Versus D.F.C., 
SIALKOT and others”(1998 P Cr. L J 1441); “SHAHBAZ AHMAD 
Versus The STATE and others” (2021 P Cr. L J 1100). The Honourable 
Supreme court in an unequivocal term has explained the whole process in 
a case reported as Mst. SAFIA BANO and another Versus HOME 
DEPARTMENT GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB through Secretary and 
others” (PLD 2021 Supreme Court 488), as under:- 
“54.   Once the Court has formed a prima facie tentative opinion that 
the accused may be incapable of understanding the proceedings of 
trial or make his/her defence, it becomes obligatory upon the Court 
to embark upon conducting an inquiry to decide the issue of 
incapacity of the accused to face trial due to mental illness. Medical 
opinion is sine qua non in such an inquiry. For this purpose, the 
Court must get the accused examined by a Medical Board, to be 
notified by the Provincial Government, consisting of qualified 
medical experts in the field of mental health, to examine the accused 
person and opine whether accused is capable or otherwise to 
understand the proceedings of trial and make his/her defence. The 
report/opinion of the Medical Board must not be a mere diagnosis 
of a mental illness or absence thereof. It must be a detailed and 
structured report with specific reference to psychopathology (if any) 
in the mental functions of consciousness, intellect, thinking, mood, 
emotions, perceptions, cognition, judgment and insight. The head of 
the Medical Board shall then be examined as Court witness and such 
examination shall be reduced in writing. Both the prosecution and 
defence should be given an opportunity to cross-examine him in 
support of their respective stance. Thereafter, if the accused wishes 
to adduce any evidence in support of his/her claim, then he/she 
should be allowed to produce such evidence, including expert 
opinion with the prosecution given an opportunity to cross-examine. 
Similarly, the prosecution may also be allowed to produce evidence 
which it deems relevant to this preliminary issue with opportunity 
given to the defence to cross-examine. It is upon the consideration of 
this evidence procured and adduced before the Court that a finding 
on this question of fact i.e. the capability of the accused to face trial 
within the contemplation of sections 464 and 465 Cr.P.C. shall be 
recorded by the Court.” 
13.         For what has been discussed, the instant criminal revision is 
disposed of in the terms that the impugned order dated 16.09.2022 is 
set-aside with the direction to learned trial court to obtain fresh report 
about mental health of the accused on the pattern as ordained by 
Honourable Supreme Court in Safia Bano’s Case PLD 2021 Supreme 
Court 488 Supra and then try the fact of unsoundness of accused first, 

Criminal Revision No.173/2022.                                                                 Page 11 
 
keeping in view the directions and processes highlighted above, 
thereafter, if finds the accused as of unsound mind shall pass an order 
u/s 466 of Cr.P.C and further process shall follow as mentioned in 
Chapter XXXIV of the Code.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
              (Muhammad Amjad Rafiq) 
  
 
 
 
 
                         Judge 
Jamshaid* 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
                          JUDGE 

