Form No.HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
 
 
 
United Bank Ltd. etc.   Vs.   Chairman, PLAT, Lahore etc. 
   
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
 
 
 
11.04.2023. Mian Muhammad Azhar Saleem, Advocate for the 
petitioners-Bank. 
Respondent No.3 in person. 
 
 
Tersely, the facts, as gleaned out from this 
petition, are that while serving as Assistant in the 
United Bank Limited (the Bank), respondent No.3 
filed a Grievance Petition, before Punjab Labour 
Court No.5, Sargodha (the Labour Court) praying for 
grant of two increments on account of improving 
qualification, in terms of the United Bank Limited 
(Staff) Service Rules, 1999 (the Rules, 1999). The 
Grievance Petition filed by respondent No.3 was 
accepted by the Labour Court through order, dated 
31.03.2011, against which the Bank authorities filed 
an appeal but without any success as the same was 
dismissed by the Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal, 
Lahore (PLAT) through judgment, dated 11.09.2012; 
hence this petition. 
2. 
Learned counsel for the Bank submits that 
while rendering the impugned decisions both the fora 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__2___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
below failed to consider that after enforcement of 
Human Resource Policy, 2008 (the Policy, 2008), the 
Rules, 1999 were repealed, hence, no order could be 
passed in favour of respondent No.3; that since the 
Grievance Notice was served by respondent No.3 
upon the employer-Bank beyond the prescribed 
period of limitation, no order could be passed in his 
favour; that since Industrial Relations Ordinance, 
2011 (IRO, 2011) and the Industrial Relations Act, 
2012 
(IRA, 2012) 
were 
promulgated during 
pendency 
of 
proceedings 
before 
PLAT 
the 
jurisdiction of said forum was ousted for the reason 
that the Bank, being trans-provincial establishment, 
the competence to adjudicate upon the issue rested 
with NIRC, thus, the impugned orders being coram-
non-judice cannot sustain. Relies on Pakistan 
Telecommunication Company Ltd. v. Member NIRC 
etc. (2014 SCMR 535). 
3. 
Respondent 
No.3, 
while 
defending 
the 
impugned decisions rendered by the labour fora, 
submits that since the petitioners do not fall within 
the category of “aggrieved person” instant petition on 
their behalf is not maintainable; that as the petitioners 
have already retired from service, the power of 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__3___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
attorney tendered in their favour, being no more 
operative, instant petition cannot proceed any further; 
that the power of attorney appended with this petition 
could only be used for internal business of the Bank, 
thus, same could not be used to institute the present 
petition; that even despite repeal of the Rules, 1999, 
his case was governed under different heads of the 
Policy 2008, thus, no illegality was committed by the 
forums below; that the Bank, being a financial 
institution, no proceedings can be instituted on its 
behalf without resolution of its Board of Directors 
(BoDs) as mandated under Order XXIX rule 1 CPC; 
that since at the time of enforcement of the Policy, 
2008, his case was pending before the Labour Court 
the said policy could not be used to knock him out; 
that since neither the Bank referred to the Policy, 
2008, during proceedings before the Labour Court 
nor before PLAT it cannot be allowed to agitate the 
said point before this Court for the first time; that if 
the Bank was of the view that PLAT had no 
jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the appeal filed by it, 
it could conveniently get transfer the proceedings 
before the relevant forum but when it allowed PLAT 
to decide the appeal, it has no cheeks to challenge its 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__4___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
jurisdiction in these proceedings; that he being not 
part of clerical staff of the Bank was not covered 
under the Policy, 2008, rather his matter was to be 
governed under other related heads which are in 
vogue even till date; that the grievance raised by him 
before the Labour Court, being financial in nature, no 
period of limitation was fixed for the purpose and 
that the original power of attorney singed in favour of 
the petitioners was never filed before the Court rather 
the petitioners have banked upon copy thereof, 
hence, instant petition deserves outright dismissal. 
Relies on Chairman, Pakistan Agricultural Research 
Council (PARC), Islamabad and another v. Dr. 
Abdul Rashid, Scientific Officer (2005 PLC (C.S.) 
105), Dr. Muhammad Arslan former Vice Chancellor 
v. The Chancellor, Quaid-e-Azam University (2000 
SCMR 
181), 
Muhammad 
Masihuzzaman 
v. 
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Establish 
Division and another (PLD 1992 SC 825), Allied 
Bank of Pakistan Ltd. v. Muhammad Humayun Khan 
and others (1988 SCMR 1664), Khan Iftikhar 
Hussain Khan of Mamdot, represented by 6 heirs v. 
Messrs Ghulam Nabi Corporation Ltd., Lahore 
(PLD 1971 SC 550), Messrs Javedan Cement 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__5___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
Limited v. Director, S.I.T.E. (West) Directorate Sindh 
Employees Social Security Institution, Karachi and 2 
others (2008 PLC 312), National Insurance 
Corporation and others v. Pakistan National 
Shipping Corporation and others (2006 CLD 85) and 
M/s Sethi Straw Board Mills Ltd. v. Punjab Labour 
Court No.3, Lyallpur and 2 others (1976 PLC 901).   
4. 
While exercising his right of rebuttal, learned 
counsel representing the Bank submits that when 
power of attorney submitted by the petitioners was 
duly signed by the competent authority, their 
retirement cannot be used to abate the proceedings 
filed by the Bank. Adds that according to Order XXII 
rule 1 CPC even in the event of death of a party 
survivable claims do not abate and that the Rules, 
1999 having been repealed through the Policy, 2008, 
same cannot be considered alive to the extent of 
respondent No.3. 
5. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at 
considerable length and have also gone through the 
documents, annexed with this petition, as well as the 
case-law, cited at the bar.  

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__6___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
6. 
Firstly taking up the objection raised by 
learned counsel for the petitioners that since during 
pendency of appeal before the PLAT, IRO, 2011 was 
promulgated, the PLAT was divested of the 
jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the appeal rather the 
same could be decided by the NIRC, I have noted 
that IRO, 2011 having been enacted to the extent of 
Islamabad Capital Territory (ICT), same could not 
unnecessarily be stretched to the rest of the country. 
As far as IRA, 2012 is concerned, suffice it to note 
that the same was promulgated, on 14.03.2012, 
meaning thereby that the said enactment came into 
existence during pendency of appeal of the 
petitioner-bank. According to section 57(2)(b) of 
IRA, 2012, NIRC may, on the application of a party, 
or of its own motion, withdraw from a Labour Court 
of Province any application, proceedings or appeal 
relating to unfair labour practice. Since the Bank 
itself allowed PLAT to decide the appeal as neither it 
filed any application for transfer of appeal to NIRC 
nor the same was withdrawn by NIRC on its own, the 
objection raised by its counsel in these proceedings 
carries no weight, thus, the same is accordingly 
spurned. 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__7___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
7. 
Now reverting to the merits of the case, I have 
noted that the B.A. Result Card was issued to 
respondent No.3, on 11.09.2008, whereas the Rules, 
1999, were repealed on 02.09.2008 meaning thereby 
that the Rules, 1999, were no more alive on the date 
when result card was issued in favour of respondent 
No.3. A learned Division Bench of Sindh High Court 
in the case of Messrs International Finance 
Investment and Commerce Bank Limited v. Messrs 
United Bank Limited and 4 others (2000 CLC 1177) 
while dealing with the effect of repeal of a provision 
has inter-alia held as under:- 
“10. It may be specifically pointed out that the 
repeal of a law, or expiry of an Ordinance, 
does not revive what such a law had deleted 
or repealed. Analogy is on the reality that 
once one is killed, in whatever manner, the 
death of the killer shall not resuscitate him. 
Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 as 
well as Article 264 of the Constitution give the 
law on this point. Both are almost identical 
provisions. 
Under 
Article 
89 
of 
the 
Constitution, an Ordinance stands repealed 
on expiry of four months, and Article 264(a) 
of the Constitution provides that where a law 
is repealed, or is deemed to have been 
repealed, by, under, or by virtue of the 
Constitution, the repeal shall not, except as 
otherwise provided in the Constitution, revive 
anything not in force or existing at the time at 
which the repeal takes effect.” 
8. 
It is of common knowledge that prior to 
issuance of formal result card, no person can be given 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__8___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
any benefit merely on the basis of just participation 
in the examination. A cursory glance over the 
decision of the Labour Court shows that the said 
forum decided the issue, under discussion, in a 
slipshod manner. To fortify said fact reference can be 
made to the following portion from the decision of 
the Labour Court. 
 
“7. 
Staff Service Rules, 1999 are Ex.P.5. 
Clause 59(1) speaks about the grant of two 
increments for obtaining a Bachelor degree. 
The contention of the petitioner has been 
supported by the Regional Operation Head, 
UBL Regional Headquarter, Sargodha which 
letter is Ex.P.6. Learned counsel for the 
respondents' bank has relied upon the staff 
circular No. 1675 dated 01.02.2010(Ex. R.1). 
The said Circular speaks about the grant of 
benefits to the employee on the basis of their 
evaluation of performance and conduct. While 
placing the said evidence in juxtaposition, I 
am of the view that the Circular dated 
01.02.2010 has got no overriding effect on the 
rules of 1999. The rules as said above are still 
operational and having force that if any 
employee 
of 
the 
bank 
improves 
his 
qualification has been held entitled to the 
annual increments as is claimed by the 
petitioner. I am, therefore, convinced to 
accept the grievance petition which is 
accepted with costs. Order be implemented 
within one oath. Be consigned.” 
 
From above, it is crystal clear that question as to 
whether the Rules, 1999, were effective after 
02.09.2008 was not responded in its true perspective. 
Further, the findings of PLAT that the Rules, 1999, 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__9___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
stood repealed w.e.f. 02.09.2008 are sufficient to 
nullify the conclusion arrived at by the Labour Court. 
9. 
It is important to observe over here that if 
relief is not covered under any policy/law same 
cannot be granted by this Court in exercise of its 
constitutional jurisdiction. Reliance in this regard is 
placed on the cases reported as Chairman, Federal 
Board of Revenue, Islamabad v. Atta Muhammad 
Mahsud and others (2017 PLC (C.S.) Note 58), 
Messrs Adamjee Insurance Company Ltd. through 
Managing Director and another (2010 CLD 280), 
Faysal Bank Limited v. Punjab Labour Court and 
another (2002 PLC 244) and Pakistan Insurance 
Corporation v. Haji Ghaffar through Legal Heirs 
and 3 others (1999 CLC 1190). Insofar as the case in 
hand is concerned, admittedly, the Rules, 1999 were 
repealed on 02.09.2008 and the same were not 
effective on 11.09.2008 when B.A. Result Card was 
issued to respondent No.3 on the basis whereof he 
submitted application for grant of increments. 
10. 
It is very strange to note that on the one hand, 
respondent No.3 took specific plea that the Policy, 
2008, was inapplicable to his case but on the other, 
while relying on the same, he claimed benefits with 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__10___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
the plea that since his matter fell within the category 
of pending matters, his right for grant of two advance 
increments could not be taken away on account of 
repeal of the Rules, 1999. Even otherwise, a perusal 
of the Policy, 2008 shows that under the heading of 
Applicable Laws, Rules and Regulations for only 
Clerical/Non-Clerical Staff (CS/NCS) it was inter-
alia clarified as under:-  
Besides existing UBL Staff Service Rules, the 
Clerical/Non-Clerical Staff are governed by 
the following Laws:- 
1. Industrial Relations Ordinance, 2002. 
 
2. The Industrial & Commercial Employment 
(Standing 
Orders) 
Ordinance-1968, 
as 
amended from time to time. 
 
3. Banking Companies Ordinance-1962, as 
amended in 1997, as the Banking Companies 
 
4.  (sic) (Amendment) Act-1997. 
 
5. Inordinate delay on part of the Inquiry 
Officer (IO) will require review by the 
Management and may lead to written warning 
to the IO.” 
 
None of the afore-quoted sub-clauses support claim 
of respondent No.3 for grant of two increments on 
the basis of the Rules, 1999 especially when the same 
were not in field on the date of submission of 
application by him. 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__11___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
11. 
 It is well entrenched by now that appeal is 
considered continuation of the original proceedings 
and the forum of appeal is bound to decide the matter 
without being influenced by the findings given by a 
forum against whose decision appeal has been filed. 
Reliance in this regard can be placed on the cases of 
Khudad v. Syed Ghazanfar Ali Shah @ S. Inaam 
Hussain (2022 SCMR 933) and Mushtaq ul Aarifin 
v. Mumtaz Muhammad (2022 SCMR 55). A perusal 
of judgment of PLAT shows that instead of 
appreciating the controversy independently it toed the 
line of the Labour Court and decided the matter on 
the basis of suppositions. To fortify this fact 
reference can be made to the following portion from 
the judgment of PLAT:- 
 
“4. 
Record, comprising his degree and 
result 
transcript, 
discloses 
that 
the 
Respondent appeared in the B.A (General 
Group) examination in the autumn of 2007 
and it is on 02.09.2008 that he was declared 
as having passed the examination held by the 
Allama Iqbal Open University, Islamabad. 
The result card was issued to the Respondent 
on 11.09.2008 while the B.A. degree was 
issued on 14.05.2009. His claim for grant of 
the two annual increments is being denied on 
the ground that the Staff Service Rules, 1999, 
were not applicable as they had been replaced 
in 2008 by performance based criteria. In this 
regard, the Appellant Bank had relied upon 
its Circular No.1675 dated 01.02.2010 while 
defending the Respondent's claim for two 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__12___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
annual increments before the learned Labour 
Court. In addition, the learned counsel for the 
Appellant Bank has placed on record UBL's 
Human Resource Policy Manual, issued by 
Mr. Ayaz H. Shamsi, being the Group 
Executive Human Resources of the Appellant 
Bank. This Manual, issued on 02.09.2008, 
states in the second last para of its Preface 
that "The PPPM of 1999 & the United Bank 
Ltd. (Staff) Service Rules, 1999 are hereby 
repealed.” This clearly means that the Staff 
Service Rules, 1999, were in force and were 
duly recognized by the Appellant Bank until 
2.9.2008. It also follows that the repeal of the 
Staff Service Rules, 1999, with effect from 
02.09.2008, would not deny the advantage of 
Rule 59(1)(b) to an employee who had taken 
an examination prior to 02.09.2008 as at that 
time Rule 59(1)(b) was in force and had not 
been "repealed". It would be unfair and 
inequitable to deny an employee the benefit of 
Rule 59(1)(b) where he sat in the examination 
on the faith of Rule 59(1)(b) before its repeal 
but the result of the examination was declared 
at a date after the repeal. So far as the 
Respondent is concerned, he took the B.A. 
examination in the autumn of the year 2007 
while the result of the examination was 
declared on 2.9.2008, the very day the Staff 
Service Rules, 1999, were repealed. Assuming 
the two to have been issued simultaneously, 
the right of the Respondent to receive two 
annual increments cannot be taken away as it 
had matured on 02.09.2009. In view of the 
UBL's Human Resource Policy Manual dated 
02.09.2009, which was not submitted before 
the learned Labour Court, it is clear that the 
Staff Service Rules, 1999, were expressly 
repealed with effect from 02.09.2009. As such, 
there is no need to refer to Circular No.1675 
dated 01.02.2010 which, as has been rightly 
held by the learned Labour Court, has no 
over-riding effect on the Staff Service Rules, 
1999. However, the said Rules cannot be said 
to be operational after their repeal on 
02.09.2009.” 
 
(emphasis provided) 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__13___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
From above, it is abundantly clear that PLAT 
admitted repeal of the Rules 1999 w.e.f. 02.09.2009 
but despite that it dismissed the appeal of the Bank 
by observing that respondent No.3 was entitled to 
annual increments irrespective of repeal of the Rules, 
1999 without caring for the fact that decision of 
Labour Court did not qualify the test of a judicial 
verdict. 
12. 
Respondent No.3 repeatedly argued that since 
the persons, who filed this petition had already 
retired, instant petition cannot proceed. In this regard, 
I am of the view that petitioner No.1, being a bank 
falls within the definition of a juristic person, thus, 
instant petition cannot be held non-maintainable just 
on account of retirement of its President. Further an 
incumbent of a post retires but the designation still 
subsists. It is not the case of respondent No.3 that the 
Bank is not in existence at the moment, thus, 
proceedings on its behalf cannot be held non-
maintainable.  
13. 
Now taking up the plea of respondent No.3 
that since the present petition was filed without the 
resolution by the Board of Directors of the Bank the 
same is untenable, I am of the view that since the 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__14___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
officers, who filed this petition, were duly authorized 
by the relevant authorities, this petition cannot be 
dismissed on the point of maintainability. The 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the matter of 
Messrs Liberty Car Parking (Pvt.) Ltd. through 
Director v. Commissioner Inland Revenue (Ex-
Commissioner of Income Tax/Wealth Tax), Lahore 
and others (2021 SCMR 375), while dealing with the 
question relating to competence of an authorized 
person to institute proceedings before a court of law 
without resolution of the Board of Directors, has 
inter alia held as under:- 
 
“7. 
The 
learned 
High 
Court 
while 
knocking out the petitioner mainly observed 
that the company is a juristic person and its 
functions are regulated and conducted by the 
Board of Directors and the company acts 
through its Board of Directors. The Court 
further held that any officer of the company 
shall 
perform 
any 
act 
only 
on 
the 
authorization of the Board of Directors and 
by no other means and the same shall be by a 
proper resolution. We may observe that by 
now the law has been well settled. This Court 
in Rahat and Co. v. Trading Corporation of 
Pakistan 
(PLD 
2020 
SC 
366) 
has 
categorically held that a company is a juristic 
entity and it can duly authorize any person to 
sign the plaint or the written statement on its 
behalf and this would be regarded as 
sufficient compliance with the provisions of 
Code of Civil Procedure. It has also been held 
that a person may be expressly authorized 
either by the Board of Directors or by a 
power of attorney. However, in absence 
thereof and in cases where pleadings have 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__15___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
been signed by one of its officers, the same 
can be accredited by the company by express 
or implied action. It would be advantageous 
to reproduce the relevant portion of the said 
judgment. The same reads as under:- 
"10. It cannot be disputed that a 
company like the appellant can sue 
and be sued in its own name. Under 
Order VI, Rule 14 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure a pleading is required to 
be signed by the party and its pleader, 
if any. As a company is a juristic 
entity it is obvious that some person 
has to sign the pleadings on behalf of 
the company. Order XXIX, Rule 1 of 
the 
Code 
of 
Civil 
Procedure, 
therefore, provides that in a suit by 
against a corporation the Secretary or 
any Director or other Principal 
Officer of the corporation who is able 
to depose to the facts of the case 
might sign and verify on behalf of the 
company. Reading Order VI, Rule 14 
together with Order XXIX, Rule 1 of 
the Code of Civil Procedure it would 
appear that even in the absence of any 
formal letter of authority or power of 
attorney having been executed a 
person referred to in Rule 1 of Order 
XXIX can, by virtue of the office 
which he holds, sign and verify the 
pleadings 
on 
behalf 
of 
the 
corporation. In addition thereto and 
de hors Order XXIX, Rule 1 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, as a 
company is a juristic entity, it can 
duly authorise any person to sign the 
plaint or the written statement on its 
behalf and this would be regarded as 
sufficient 
compliance 
with 
the 
provisions of Order VI, Rule 14 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure. A person 
may be expressly authorised to sign 
the pleadings on behalf of the 
company, for example by the Board of 
Directors passing a resolution to that 
effect or by a power of attorney being 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__16___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
executed in favour of any individual. 
In absence thereof and in cases where 
pleadings have been signed by one of 
its officers a Corporation can ratify 
the said action of its officer in signing 
the pleadings. Such ratification can 
be express or implied. The Court can, 
on the basis of the evidence on 
record, and after taking all the 
circumstances of the case, specially 
with regard to the conduct of the trial, 
come to the conclusion that the 
corporation had ratified the act of 
signing of the pleading by its officer." 
 
  
(Underlined is to provide emphasis) 
 
8. 
We have been informed that although 
the appeals filed before the High Court were 
not authorized by Board of Directors by 
proper resolution but they were duly signed 
by the Chief Executive Officer of the 
petitioner company. According to section 
2(18) of the Wealth Tax Act, 1963, the 
definition "Principal Officer" is used with 
reference to a company, means the secretary, 
manager, managing agent or managing 
director of the company, and includes any 
person connected with the management of the 
affairs of the company upon whom the Deputy 
Commissioner has served a notice of his 
intention of treating him as the principal 
officer thereof. The definition of „principal 
officer‟ clearly shows that the Chief Executive 
Officer of the petitioner company is the 
principal officer and if he had signed the 
appeals before the High Court, the same 
would be accorded as express ratification by 
the company. In this view of the matter, the 
learned High Court ought to have decided the 
appeals on merits and not on technical 
grounds. 
 
9. 
For what has been discussed above, 
we are of the considered view that the 
impugned judgment of the High Court is not 
based on the proper appreciation of law. 
Consequently, we convert these petitions into 
appeals, set aside the impugned judgment and 
remand the case back to the High Court to 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__17___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
decide the appeals filed by the petitioner 
afresh in accordance with law.” 
14. 
Respondent No.3 repeatedly argued that the 
Policy, 2008, was in existence at the time of 
pendency of matter before the forums below. The 
said assertion of respondent No.3 stands negated 
from the following portion of judgment of PLAT:- 
 
“2. 
Learned counsel for the Appellant 
Bank has argued that the Staff Service Rules, 
1999 including Ruled 59(1)(b) thereof, 
providing for grant of advance increments on 
improvement of educational qualifications, 
are no more in existence and have been 
replaced in 2008 by UBL‟s Human Resource 
Police Manual as well as by Circular 
No.1675 dated 01.02.2010…..” 
Moreover, the Bank also contested the Grievance 
Petition filed by respondent No.3 by inter alia raising 
objection that after repeal of the Rules, 1999 relief 
claimed by respondent No.3 was not tenable. In this 
scenario, the plea raised by respondent No.3 cannot 
be given any weightage. 
15. 
Now coming to the objection raised by 
respondent 
No.3 
against 
competence 
of 
the 
petitioners to file this petition on the basis of Power 
of Attorney, I am of the view that a perusal of Power 
of Attorney attached with this petition shows that the 
petitioners were empowered to institute/defend 
proceedings before different forums, thus, the 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__18___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
objection raised by respondent No.3 carries no 
weight. While dealing with somewhat similar 
situation, this Court, in the case of Soneri Bank 
Limited v. Messrs Multan Rice mills and others (2017 
CLD 1731) has inter alia concluded as under: - 
 
“7. 
The suit has been instituted by the 
plaintiff bank through its officials and their 
powers of attorneys have also been appended 
with the plaint. Section 9 of the Ordinance 
empowers three categories of persons to file a 
suit (a) the branch manager (b) an officer 
authorized by a power of attorney and (c) an 
officer who is otherwise authorized by a 
financial institution. It is quite clear that an 
officer of a financial institution who holds a 
power of attorney in his favour need not 
append anything else other than the said 
power of attorney to demonstrate his 
authority to institute the suit under section 9 
of the Ordinance. Had it not been so, section 
9 of the Ordinance would have required 
production of further documents other than 
the power of attorney by the attorney holder 
to demonstrate the authorization of the person 
executing the power of attorney. Under 
section 9 of the Ordinance, an officer of the 
financial institution holding a power of 
attorney is the designated person to file suits 
on its behalf (see Ihsan-ul-Haq v. MCB Bank 
Limited 2016 CLC 187). The suit of the 
plaintiff bank has, thus, competently been 
filed.” 
16. 
During arguments, respondent No.3 pleaded 
that since the Power of Attorney used by the 
petitioners to file this petition was meant for internal 
working of the Bank, same could not be used to 
justify maintainability of this petition. The plea of 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__19___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
respondent No.3 stands negated from the recitals of 
the Officer’s Power of Attorney on the basis whereof 
the present petition was filed. Moreover, when 
proceedings have been instituted by an authorized 
person of a bank, the same cannot be held non-
maintainable. Reliance in this regard can be placed 
on the cases reported as First Dawood Investment 
Bank Ltd. v. Bank Islami Pakistan Ltd. (2019 SCMR 
1925), Messrs Bahawalpur Cotton Company v. 
United Bank Limited (2021 CLD 434) and Allied 
Bank Limited through Principal Officers v. Messrs 
S.G. Polypropylene Pvt. Ltd. through Directors/Chief 
Executive and 5 others (2018 CLD 199).  In the case 
of  First Dawood Investment Bank Ltd. (Supra) the 
Apex Court of the country has clinched the issue, 
under discussion, in the following manner: - 
“6. In our opinion, Mr. Abdul Hafeez Lakho's 
contention that the powers of attorney were 
issued on behalf of the credit administration 
department and the Legal Department and not 
by the bank itself, is negated on the face of the 
same as they have been executed by the Chief 
Executive Officer of the bank and authorizes 
the two officers of the bank to file suits etc. for 
recovery of money and other purposes before 
the Courts in Pakistan and hence the words 
appearing in the power of attorney in the 
recitals i.e. on behalf of the legal department 
or the credit administration department are 
merely explanatory. Insofar as the cases cited 
by the learned ASC are concerned, we find 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__20___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
that they are not at all relevant to the facts of 
the instant case. 
7. For all the foregoing reasons, this Petition 
is dismissed and Leave declined.” 
If the objection raised by respondent No.3 is 
considered in the light of the afore-referred 
judgments there leaves no doubt that it hardly holds 
any water, therefore, is accordingly spurned. 
17. 
Now coming to the case-law, referred by 
respondent No.3, I am of the view that the same 
being inapplicable to the facts and circumstances of 
the present case is of no help to him inasmuch as in 
the cases of Chairman, Pakistan Agricultural 
Research Council (PARC), Islamabad and another 
and Muhammad Masihuzzaman (Supra), the Apex 
Court of the country upheld the judgment of the 
Federal Service Tribunal for the reason that once 
promotion was granted to a civil servant, the same 
could not be withdrawn and no limitation runs 
against a void order but when the question of 
limitation is irrelevant in the case of respondent No.3, 
the cases, under discussion, are distinguishable. 
Insofar as the case of Dr. Muhammad Arslan former 
Vice Chancellor (Supra) is concerned, the Apex 
Court of the country granted leave to consider that as 
to whether the petitioner, in the said case, could be 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__21___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
denied relief especially when he was not seeking his 
reinstatement rather he was clamouring for payment 
of his arrears. Firstly, the order of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan, being a leave granting 
order, has no binding force and secondly, question 
involved in this case is entirely different as it is yet to 
be decided by this Court as to whether respondent 
No.3 was entitled for annual increments on 
improvement of education even despite repeal of 
Rules, 1999. As far as case of Allied Bank of 
Pakistan Ltd. (Spura) is concerned, suffice it to note 
that in the referred case the power of attorney was 
regarding the delegation of some powers for financial 
transaction which is not the position in the case in 
hand inasmuch as the bank officers, who filed the 
present writ petition, were duly authorized by the 
competent authority to pursue the proceedings on 
behalf of the Bank before different forums and to 
institute proceedings on its behalf, thus said case also 
stands distinguish. Taking up the cases of Khan 
Iftikhar Hussain Khan of Mamdot, represented by 6 
heirs, Messrs Javedan Cement Limited and National 
Insurance Corporation and others (Supra) I am of 
the view that the procedure to give authorization on 

 
 
W.P. No. 25212 of 2012. 
              
Continuous Sheet No.__22___ 
 
S.No. of order/ 
proceeding 
Date of order/ 
proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
behalf of a company, corporation or banking 
company are entirely different. Moreover, as 
discussed earlier, the Apex Court of the country in 
the case of First Dawood Investment Bank (supra) 
has declared the power of attorney issued in favour of 
different authorities of the bank are as good as 
executed by private persons in favour of someone 
else, thus, the cases under discussion are of no help 
to respondent No.3. Now coming to the case of 
Messrs Sethi Straw Board Mills Ltd. (Supra) , I have 
noted that the said case revolves around the limitation 
provided to the employee to serve Grievance Notice 
upon the employer but when respondent No.3 is not 
being knocked out on the point of limitation said 
judgment is also becomes irrelevant. 
18. 
As a sequel to above discussion, this petition 
is accepted and the impugned decisions referred by 
the labour forums are set-aside. As a result the 
Grievance Petition filed by respondent No.3 shall 
stand dismissed. No order as to costs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shujaat Ali Khan) 
Judge 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
      Approved for Reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Judge 
                                   G R * 

