 
 
Stereo. H C J D A 38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
LAHORE HIGH COURT,  
MULTAN BENCH, MULTAN 
 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
C. R. No. 1053 / 2004 
 
Ghulam Yasin etc. 
 
Versus 
 
Hussain Bakhsh etc. 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
Date of Hearing: 
21.02.2023 
Petitioners By: 
Mr. Rafique Ahmad Malik, Advocate 
Respondents By: 
Mr. Ahsan Raza Hashmi, Advocate 
 
ABID HUSSAIN CHATTHA, J: This Civil Revision is directed against 
the impugned Judgment and Decree dated 13.07.2004 passed by the 
Additional District Judge, Karor, District Layyah, whereby, the suit for 
declaration instituted by the Respondents / Plaintiffs against the Petitioners 
/ Defendants was decreed by reversing the Judgment and Decree dated 
17.12.2003 passed by the Civil Judge, Karor, District Layyah, whereby, 
the suit of the Respondents / Plaintiffs had been dismissed. 
2. 
 
At the very outset, learned counsel for the Respondents raised 
an objection to the effect that the titled Civil Revision was barred by time 
based on a subsequent note put up by the Office on 06.11.2004. Although, 
he did not provide any assistance as to how this Petition was barred by 
time yet insisted to obtain the requisite report from the Office. 
Accordingly, the report was requisitioned, which reveals that the titled 
Civil Revision was filed vide Diary No. 1958 dated 19.10.2004 against the 
impugned Judgment and Decree dated 13.07.2004. On 23.10.2004, the 
Office raised certain objections including one pertaining to limitation by 
noting that the dates mentioned in the stamp of Copying Agency are 

2 
 
 
 
 
C. R. No. 1053 / 2004 
 
 
ambiguous and as such, period of limitation would be calculated after 
seeking due clarification. Thereafter, learned counsel for the Petitioners 
received back the case file and refiled the same vide Diary No. 1319 dated 
30.10.2004. At this point, the office while calculating the period of 
limitation put up a note to the effect that the Petition was time barred by 04 
days and required the Petitioner to file an application for condonation of 
delay. Accordingly, C. M. No. 1-C / 2004 was filed by the Petitioners on 
06.11.2004. The Petition was fixed for hearing on 01.12.2004 when 
notices were issued to the Respondents on the main Petition as well as on 
all pending applications.  
3. 
 
The Petition is under adjudication since 2004. It was formally 
admitted for hearing on 29.04.2009 for the main reason that the Judgments 
of the Courts below were at variance. There was no judicial determination 
in terms of Rule 9-A of Chapter 1, Volume-VII of the Rules & Orders of 
the Lahore High Court, Lahore in the light of law laid down in case titled, 
“Farman Ali v. Muhammad Ishaq and others” (PLD 2013 Supreme Court 
392) with respect to office objections. Moreover, Section 115 of the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (the “CPC”) confers even suo motu jurisdiction 
upon this Court in exercise of revisional jurisdiction vested in it. 
Revisional jurisdiction is discretionary, pre-eminently corrective and 
supervisory, therefore, there is absolutely no harm if the Court seized of a 
Revision Petition exercises its suo motu jurisdiction to examine and correct 
errors of jurisdiction committed by a subordinate Court or otherwise 
condones delay by exercising the discretion vested in the Court. Since the 
Judgments of the Courts below are at variance, the delay of four days in 
filing the Civil Revision is hereby condoned by allowing C. M. No. 1-C / 
2004, supported by an affidavit, for the reasons disclosed therein. For 
reference, see case titled, “Chief Executive, PESCO Department, 
Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Peshawar and others v. Afnan Khan 
and another” (2021 SCMR 2100). 
4. 
 
For ease of reference, the Petitioners / Defendants and the 
Respondents / Plaintiffs in the titled Civil Revision shall hereinafter be 
referred to with respect to their respective description as arrayed in the 
suit. 

3 
 
 
 
 
C. R. No. 1053 / 2004 
 
 
5. 
 
The brief facts of the case as averred in the plaint are that 
Karam Hussain son of Ghulam Qamber Khan / Defendant No. 1 inherited 
land measuring 09 Kanals and 13 Marlas through inheritance mutation No. 
902 dated 30.09.1954 situated in Mouza Siwag out of which he sold 06 
Kanals & 09 Marlas land to Khuda Bakhsh / Defendant No. 6 vide 
mutation No. 905 dated 30.09.1954 leaving 03 Kanals and 04 Marlas with 
him. Ghulam Akbar Khan, an uncle of Defendant No. 1 also owned 09 
Kanals and 13 Marlas of land who died issueless. Karam Hussain / 
Defendant No. 1 inherited 04 Kanals & 16 Marlas of land out of the estate 
of Ghulam Akbar vide mutation No. 1239 dated 15.03.1965 and 
accordingly, became owner of 08 Kanals of land in Chak No. 99 / TDA, 
Tehsil Karor, District Layyah (the “suit property”) which he sold out 
along with possession to the Plaintiffs vide registered sale deed No. 1580 
dated 06.12.1957 (the “First Sale Deed”). It was incorporated in the First 
Sale Deed that inherited share of land of Karam Hussain / Defendant No. 1 
received from the estate of Ghulam Akbar was included in the suit 
property. As such, the Plaintiffs were owners in possession of the suit 
property since then and had spent considerable resources to improve the 
suit property. Later, Mouza Siwag was divided into Chak No. 99 / TDA 
and 99-B / TDA. A few days before the institution of the suit, Muhammad 
Bakhsh / Defendant No. 5 filed an application for partition of land before 
the Revenue Officer regarding land in Chak No. 99 / TDA which prompted 
the Plaintiffs to scrutinize the revenue record. It transpired that Karam 
Hussain / Defendant No. 1 had sold out the suit property to Defendants No. 
2 to 4 through registered sale deed No. 3116 dated 15.09.1975 (the 
“Second Sale Deed”) who had further sold it to Defendant No. 5 through 
Mutation No. 52 dated 31.10.1981 and to Defendant No. 6 vide mutation 
No. 159 dated 19.02.1988. Hence, the Second Sale Deed and subsequent 
mutations were unlawful and inoperative qua the rights of the Plaintiffs 
which were liable to be cancelled for the reason that the suit property 
constituted the entire holding of Karam Hussain / Defendant No. 1 who 
had already divested himself of the same through the First Sale Deed and 
as such, could not resell the suit property. It further transpired that through 
an order of adjustment, suit property measuring 08 Kanals was shown to 

4 
 
 
 
 
C. R. No. 1053 / 2004 
 
 
be situated to the extent of 04 Kanals and 16 Marlas in Chak No. 99 / TDA 
and 03 Kanals & 05-Marlas in Chak No. 99-B / TDA which was also 
against the law and facts and as such, the order of adjustment was liable to 
be set aside. However, notwithstanding the order of adjustment, the 
Plaintiffs were entitled to get possession of share of the suit property 
having fallen in Chak No. 99-B / TDA. At the same time, it was claimed 
that the original First Sale Deed had been misplaced and could not be 
found but being a 30 years old document, a certified copy thereof had been 
appended with the plaint. It was also stated that when the original First 
Sale Deed was being copied by the Clerk of Sub-Registrar, he mistakenly 
mentioned the name of Defendant No. 1 as Karam Hussain son of Ghulam 
Akbar Khan instead of Karam Hussain son of Ghulam Qamber Khan. 
Nevertheless, on the register of the Petition Writer and in the Registry 
Note of the Sub-Registrar, the name was correctly recorded as Karam 
Hussain son of Ghulam Qamber Khan. It was prayed that the suit for 
declaration be decreed to the effect that the Plaintiffs were owners in 
possession of the suit property on the basis of the First Sale Deed by 
cancelling the Second Sale Deed along with subsequent mutations. 
6. 
 
The Defendants contested the suit by way of filing written 
statement. Apart from a number of preliminary objections, the claim of 
ownership and possession of the Petitioners qua the suit property was 
denied. It was alleged that Karam Hussain / Defendant No. 1 had never 
sold the suit property to the Plaintiffs, rather, it was sold out by him to 
Defendants No. 2 to 4. The Defendants were in possession of the suit 
property as owners. The First Sale Deed was fake, fictitious, without 
consideration and a fraudulently manufactured document. Conspicuously, 
written statement was also signed by Karam Hussain / Defendant No. 1. 
7. 
 
The Trial Court framed the following issues arising out of the 
divergent pleadings of the parties:- 
“1. 
Whether the plaintiffs are owners in possession of the 
land in dispute vide registered sale deed No. 1580 dated 
06.12.57? OPP 
 
2. 
Whether the impugned sale deed No. 3116 dated 
15.09.75 is illegal, wrong, against the facts, ineffective 
and inoperative on plaintiff's rights? OPP 

5 
 
 
 
 
C. R. No. 1053 / 2004 
 
 
 
3. 
Whether subsequent alienation of the disputed land 
under the impugned sale deed No. 3116 in favour of 
remaining defendants is wrong, illegal against the facts, 
ineffective and inoperative on plaintiff's rights? OPP 
 
4. 
Whether the suit is time barred? OPD 
 
5. 
Whether the suit is under-valued for the purpose of 
court fee and jurisdiction? If so, its effect and what is 
the correct valuation? OPD 
 
6. 
Whether the description of suit land is incorrect? If so, 
what is the correct description? OPD 
 
7. 
Whether the shape of the suit is wrong? OPD 
  
8. 
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary 
parties? OPD 
 
9. 
Whether the plaintiffs are estopped to file this suit by 
their words and conduct? OPD 
 
10. 
Whether the plaintiffs have got no cause of action? 
OPD 
 
11. 
Relief.” 
 
8. 
 
After recording of respective evidence of the parties, the Trial 
Court dismissed the suit of the Plaintiffs. However, the Appellate Court set 
aside the Judgment of the Trial Court and decreed the suit in favor of the 
Plaintiffs.  
9. 
 
Arguments heard and record perused. 
10. 
 
It is evident from the facts of the case that the success of the 
Plaintiffs hinges upon the validity and authenticity of the First Sale Deed. 
The onus to prove the First Sale Deed was placed upon the Plaintiffs. The 
certified copy of the First Sale Deed was exhibited as Ex. P-9 in the 
statement of counsel for the Plaintiffs subject to objection raised by 
learned counsel for the Defendants regarding its production, admissibility 
and proof. While claiming ownership and possession based upon the First 
Sale Deed, it was admitted by the Plaintiffs that the same was lost. 
However, at the same time, it was claimed that a certified copy thereof, 
was admissible being a thirty year’s old document carrying the 

6 
 
 
 
 
C. R. No. 1053 / 2004 
 
 
presumption of truth. Importantly, existence, execution, validity and 
authenticity of the First Sale Deed was denied in the written statement.   
11. 
 
The Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 (the “QSO”) currently 
regulates the law of evidence in Pakistan which repealed the Evidence Act, 
1872 (the “Evidence Act”). The First Sale Deed was executed in 1957, 
therefore, the Plaintiffs were required to prove its admissibility, execution 
and validity in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Evidence 
Act at the relevant time. The First Sale Deed being a disputed document 
was admissible only subject to proof under Article 79 of the QSO (Section 
68 of the Evidence Act) as it was not admissible per se under Article 88 of 
the QSO (Section 77 of the Evidence Act). It was imperative to establish 
the First Sale Deed as a relevant and admissible fact as an admissible piece 
of evidence by the Plaintiffs asserting the same in the manner provided 
under Articles 70-89 of the QSO (Sections 59-78 of the Evidence Act) in 
terms of primary or secondary evidence. As the Plaintiffs had conceded in 
the plaint that the original First Sale Deed had been lost, the primary 
evidence was not available and the only option to prove the same was 
through secondary evidence. Article 76(c) of the QSO (Section 65(c) of 
the Evidence Act) ordains that secondary evidence may be given of the 
existence, condition or contents of a document when the original has been 
destroyed or lost.  
12. 
 
The principles of the law of evidence as to the relevancy of 
material facts, their admissibility, modes of proof and determination of 
evidentiary value thereof were exquisitely articulated in case titled, “Mst. 
Akhtar Sultana v. Major Retd. Muzaffar Khan Malik through his legal 
heirs and others” (PLD 2021 Supreme Court 715). It was observed by the 
Apex Court that generally, an objection as to the mode of proof regarding 
a document, its contents or its execution is required to be taken, when a 
particular mode of proof is adopted at the stage of recording of evidence. 
In contrast, an objection as to the admissibility of a document can be raised 
at any stage of trial, appeal or revision even if it has not been taken when 
the document is tendered in evidence. In the instant case, the objection 
regarding the proof of the First Sale Deed was taken at the time when it 
was tendered in evidence and the same was brought on record subject to 

7 
 
 
 
 
C. R. No. 1053 / 2004 
 
 
objection. As such, it was of no surprise for the Plaintiffs regarding their 
obligation under the applicable law to prove the First Sale Deed through 
permissible modes of proof especially when the Plaintiffs had earlier 
conceded the loss of original First Sale Deed since a judgment under the 
provisions of Article 161 of the QSO (Section 165 of the Evidence Act) 
must be based upon relevant facts duly proved as provided by the QSO. It, 
therefore, follows that a party may adopt any of the permissible mode to 
prove a document but when the QSO / the Evidence Act provides only one 
mode or more modes for proving a relevant fact and that mode or none of 
the permissible modes are adopted, the case falls within the purview of 
‘absence of proof’ as distinguished from ‘mode of proof’ and objection 
thereto can be taken at any stage of trial, appeal or revision even it has not 
been taken at the stage of evidence. It is only when a fact qualifies the test 
of relevancy, admissibility and proof in terms of applicable principles of 
evidence that it can be said to have been admitted in terms of its 
evidentiary value to be adjudged by the Court. For reference, also see 
cases titled, “Syed Shabbir Hussain Shah and others v. Asghar Hussain 
Shah and others” (2007 SCMR 1884); and “Syed Mansoor Ahmad v. Mst. 
Maqbool Begum and others” (1990 SCMR 1259). 
13. 
 
The loss of the original First Sale Deed was admitted by the 
Plaintiffs in the plaint. The existence, contents and execution of the First 
Sale Deed were specifically denied by the Defendants in the Written 
Statement. Specific objection to the production of the certified copy of the 
First Sale Deed in evidence was also taken. Notwithstanding the above, the 
Plaintiffs did not adopt the permissible modes of proof to prove the 
execution, existence, validity and contents of the First Sale Deed. No 
application was filed to obtain the leave of the Court to produce secondary 
evidence. PW-1 while narrating the incident of loss of the original First 
Sale Deed deposed that it was handed over to the concerned Patwari for 
attestation of mutation who later informed the Plaintiffs that it was lost. 
However, the said Patwari was never produced as a witness to testify the 
loss of the original First Sale Deed. In the same breath, it was admitted that 
loss of the original First Sale Deed was never reported to the Police. The 
date, time and surrounding circumstances regarding the alleged loss of the 

8 
 
 
 
 
C. R. No. 1053 / 2004 
 
 
original First Sale Deed remained shrouded in mystery. As such, the loss 
of the original First Sale Deed was not established which was a condition 
precedent to produce secondary evidence, thus making it inadmissible. 
None of the marginal witnesses of the First Sale Deed were produced. No 
evidence was tendered to establish that the marginal witnesses had died or 
could not be found. Karam Hussain / Defendant No. 1 had signed and 
thumb marked the written statement. He was never produced in the witness 
box by the Plaintiffs. When confronted, learned counsel for the Plaintiffs 
submitted that he died during the pendency of the suit. If so, it was 
incumbent upon the Plaintiffs to establish the fact of his death, obtain 
permission to produce secondary evidence regarding his appearance before 
the Sub-Registrar, receipt of sale consideration and affixation of his 
signatures / thumb impressions on the First Sale Deed. No comparison of 
signature or thumb impression of Karam Hussain / Defendant No. 1 was 
made in terms of Article 84 of the QSO (Section 73 of the Evidence Act). 
Thus, no endeavor was made in this respect by the Plaintiffs, knowing well 
that he was the best evidence but was withheld in terms of illustration (g) 
of Article 129 of the QSO (Section 114(g) of the Evidence Act), thus 
entailing negative inference that the withheld evidence, if produced, would 
be unfavorable to the Plaintiffs. Further, the First Sale Deed was exhibited 
in the statement of the counsel which practice has been deprecated by the 
Apex Court as it deprives the other party from its right to cross-examine. 
For reference, see cases titled, “Manzoor Hussain (deceased) through L.Rs. 
v. Misri Khan” (PLD 2020 Supreme Court 749); and Akhtar Sultana case 
(supra). 
14. 
 
It is an admitted fact that Karam Hussain / Defendant No. 1 
was the son of Ghulam Qamber Khan. The Plaintiffs had alleged in the 
plaint that the father’s name of Karam Hussain / Defendant No. 1 was 
inadvertently copied in the First Sale Deed as Ghulam Akbar Khan by the 
Registration Clerk while in the note of Sub-Registrar and the extract of 
Register of the stamp vendor, the father’s name of Karam Hussain / 
Defendant No. 1 is correctly listed as Ghulam Qamber Khan. The 
discrepancy could not be established from the testimony of the 
Registration Clerk who did not produce the Register to verify note of Sub-

9 
 
 
 
 
C. R. No. 1053 / 2004 
 
 
Registrar regarding the father’s name of Karam Hussain / Defendant No. 1. 
PW-2, Sheikh Karam Hussain, Advocate son of the Petition Writer 
deposed without any proof of death of the Petition Writer. Notwithstanding 
the same, it transpires from the Extract of the Register of Petition Writer 
(Ex. P-2) that the name of Karam Hussain son of Ghulam Qamber Khan / 
Defendant No. 1 appears against Serial No. 2093 and thumb impression 
was appended against Serial No. 2090 which entry pertains to another 
transaction regarding Zainab Bibi. As such, the inadvertent mistakes 
alleged in the plaint with respect to father’s name of Karam Hussain / 
Defendant No. 1 could not be established. PW-4 alleged Lumberdar 
candidly admitted that he was not the Lumberdar of Mouza Siwag and 
testified that he did not know the father’s name of Karam Hussain / 
Defendant No. 1 and the witnesses of the First Sale Deed. 
15. 
 
Importantly, as per the averments of the plaint, Karam 
Hussain / Defendant No. 1 had got portion of the suit property from the 
inheritance of Ghulam Akbar Khan on 15.03.1965. There was no 
conclusive proof regarding the date of death of Ghulam Akbar Khan or 
that the share of property received by Karam Hussain / Defendant No. 1 
from his inheritance was included in the suit property. The Appellate Court 
based its conclusion to the effect that Ghulam Akbar Khan had died before 
registration of the First Sale Deed and the share of inheritance received 
from his estate by Karam Hussain / Defendant No. 1 was included in the 
suit property by relying upon the contents of the First Sale Deed. The 
finding is perverse as neither the admissibility nor the execution of the 
First Sale Deed was proved.  
16. 
 
The Second Sale Deed was followed by attestation of 
mutation in the name of Defendants No. 2 to 4, whereafter, subsequent sale 
mutations had also been attested. The contention of learned counsel for the 
Plaintiffs that mutation in the name of the Plaintiffs pursuant to the First 
Sale Deed could not be entered in revenue record due to some ban on 
account of consolidation proceedings and as such, Karam Hussain / 
Defendant No. 1 taking advantage of revenue record existing in his name 
was able to execute the Second Sale Deed in favor of Defendants No. 2 to 
4 is untenable as there was no concrete evidence to establish this fact. 

10 
 
 
 
 
C. R. No. 1053 / 2004 
 
 
Even otherwise, the fact is belied since inheritance mutation in favor of 
Karam Hussain / Defendant No. 1 regarding his share of inheritance 
devolved from the estate of Ghulam Akbar Khan was attested in 1965. 
This fact alone establishes that there was no impediment regarding the 
entry in the revenue record in the name of the Plaintiffs based on the First 
Sale Deed executed in the year 1957 and prior to the Second Sale Deed 
executed in the year 1975 in favor of Defendants No. 2 to 4. The Second 
Sale Deed registered in favor of Defendants No. 2 to 4 was not under 
challenge in terms of its authenticity. The only objection thereto was that 
the same could not have been executed and registered since Karam 
Hussain / Defendant No. 1 did not own the suit property at the time of its 
registration having already sold the same to the Plaintiffs through the First 
Sale Deed. The Plaintiffs having failed to establish the due execution, 
validity and authenticity of the First Sale Deed, the due execution and 
registration of Second Sale Deed was ipso facto established coupled with 
the deposition of DW-1 which was in line with the stance of the 
Defendants taken in the written statement.  
17. 
 
Learned counsel for the Plaintiffs emphasized that the First 
Sale Deed being a certified copy of a registered public document was 
rightly and lawfully tendered in evidence in terms of Article 85(2) of the 
QSO (Section 74(2) of the Evidence Act) and could be proved as 
secondary evidence under Article 88 of the QSO (Section 77 of the 
Evidence Act). It was also contended that presumption of truth is attached 
to a thirty years old document as envisaged in Articles 100 and 101of the 
QSO (Sections 90 & 90-A of the Evidence Act). The contentions are 
misconceived. Article 85(5) of the QSO (Section 74(5) of the Evidence 
Act) expressly excludes registered documents, the execution of which is 
disputed and as such, the protection accorded in Article 85(2) of the QSO 
(Section 74(2) of the Evidence Act) to public record of private documents 
was not applicable. Once the execution of the registered First Sale Deed 
was disputed, it became a private document which was required to be 
produced and proved after complying with the requirements of Article 76 
of the QSO (Section 65 of the Evidence Act). Moreover, the rebuttable 
presumption encapsulated in Article 100 of the QSO (Section 90 of the 

11 
 
 
 
 
C. R. No. 1053 / 2004 
 
 
Evidence Act) mandates that the document must be produced from any 
custody which the Court in a particular case considers proper and in such 
an eventuality, the Court may presume that the signature and every other 
part of such document, which purports to be in the handwriting of any 
particular person, is in that person’s handwriting, and, in the case of a 
document executed or attested, that it was duly executed or attested by the 
persons by whom  it purports to be executed and attested. Article 101 
extends the provisions of Article 100 of the QSO (Sections 90-A & 90 of 
the Evidence Act) to certified documents which are not less than 30 years 
old stipulating that such certified copy may be produced in proof of the 
contents of the document which it purports to be a copy. The First Sale 
Deed was never produced through proper custody and even otherwise, the 
presumption was rebutted in an effective manner as stated aforesaid. For 
reference see case titled, “Amirzada Khan and others v. Ahmad Noor and 
others” (PLD 2003 Supreme Court 410). Hence, it is safely concluded 
that the existence, admissibility, execution and contents of the First Sale 
Deed were not proved in accordance with the requirements of the QSO 
(the Evidence Act).   
18. 
 
For the reasons recorded above, this Civil Revision is 
allowed, the impugned Judgment and Decree dated 13.07.2004 passed by 
the Additional District Judge, Karor, District Layyah is set aside and the 
Judgment and Decree dated 17.12.2003 passed by the Civil Judge, Karor, 
District Layyah is upheld. No order as to costs.  
 
 (Abid Hussain Chattha) 
 
Judge 
 
Approved for Reporting 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
*WaqaR*   
  

