HCJDA-38 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Writ Petition No.73648 of 2022 
 
  The Lahore Gymkhana 
Vs.           
The Punjab Information Commission & another  
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
Date of hearing 
 
 
16.12.2022. 
 
Petitioner(s) by 
 
 
Barrister 
Rafey 
Zeeshan 
Altaf, 
Advocate Supreme Court. 
 
 
Respondents by 
 
 
Barrister 
Tayeeb 
Jan, 
Assistant 
Advocate General. 
 
Mr. 
Azhar 
Siddique, 
Advocate 
Supreme Court. 
Abdullah Malik Advocate (Respondent 
No.2 in W.P. No.73651-2022). 
 
 
 
 SULTAN TANVIR AHMAD, J:- Through 
this decision the present petition as well as connected 
petitions bearing Nos. 73651 of 2022 and 73654 of 2022 
involving similar question(s) and being outcome of the same 
order shall be decided. 
2.  
 The facts, necessary for the decision of the 
present case, are that respondent No. 2 filed application dated 
10.02.2021 
before 
the 
petitioner 
to 
provide 
certain 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
2 
information, however, upon failure to make the disclosure and 
/ or to provide the requisite information, respondent No. 2 
approached the Punjab Information Commission (the 
‘Commission’), by way of appeal, which was contested by the 
petitioner. After hearing the arguments of both sides, the 
Commission allowed the appeal and reached to the following 
conclusion, vide order dated 08.11.2022: - 
“…As a sequel to above discussion, we 
unanimously allow all three RTI Complaints with 
direction to Secretary LGC to forward certified 
copies of requisite information at the given 
addresses of Complainants within 3 days after 
receipt of this order. The names and identities of 
members along with children and donors etc., 
shall not be disclosed on the principle of privacy 
however total number of each group with break-
up of government service members and otherwise 
will be disclosed along with all other requisite 
information requested by Complainants vide 
Annex-A...” 
 
Aggrieved from the above decision, the present petition, under 
Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973, has been filed. 
3.  
 
Barrister Rafey Zeeshan Javed Altaf, learned 
counsel for the petitioner has submitted that according to 
section 6 of the Punjab Transparency and Right to 
Information Act, 2013 (‘PTRI Act’), the Commission can only 
pass direction for the disclosure of information against a 
“public body” as defined under section 2(h) of PTRI Act, 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
3 
whereas, the petitioner being a public limited company does 
not fall within the scope of a “public body”. It is submitted by 
the learned counsel that section 2(h) of PTRI Act starts with 
the word “means” which contemplates that the definition of 
“public body” contained therein is exhaustive, hence the 
liberal construction to the expression “public body” to bring 
any other categories into its fold, including the petitioner, is 
not permissible, as per the law settled by the Honourable 
Sindh High Court in cases titled “Soneri Travel and Tours 
Ltd. through Chief Executive/Director/Secretary versus Soneri 
Bank Limited” (2011 CLD 193) and “Muhammad Hussain 
versus Messrs Adamjee Sheikh Jeevanjee and another” (2001 
MLD 1183); that the Commission has wrongly relied upon 
section 2(h)(iv) of PTRI Act to reach the conclusion that the 
petitioner is a “public body” while ignoring the rule of 
ejusdem generis; that the general words used in section 
2(h)(iv) of PTRI Act “other body” were required to be 
construed in the light of the specific words of same genus, 
which makes it amply clear that the legislature intended same 
limitation to the meaning of the words “or other body”. In this 
regard, the learned counsel has relied upon Maxwell on 
Interpretation of Statutes (twelfth edition) as well as Fourth 
Edition of the book Understanding Statutes, Canons of 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
4 
Construction (by S.M. Zafar). It is further submitted by the 
learned counsel for the petitioner that section 2(h)(vii) of 
PTRI Act contemplates “non-government organization”, as 
defined in advanced law lexicon (Third Edition) Volume-3 
(2005), in the sense of non-profit making organizations in 
private sector that provide assistance in developing Country 
through aid and by providing skilled personnel training or 
non-profit group or association etc., which has no nexus with 
the petitioner. To establish his view point that the term “non-
government organization” is used in PTRI Act for the 
organizations that are usually known as ‘NGOs’ the learned 
counsel has relied upon cases titled “Thalappalam Service 
Cooperative Bank Limited and others versus State of Kerala 
and others” [(2013) 16 Supreme Court Cases 82] and “Aitex 
Pakistan versus Government of Pakistan and others” (PLD 
2020 Lahore 1). Without prejudice to the stance that 
petitioner does not fall within the definition of “public body” 
as contemplated in section 2(h)(iv) of PTRI Act, it is 
submitted by the learned counsel of the petitioner that even 
otherwise, the grant of leasehold rights of 117 acre state 
(nazul) land does not amount to ‘substantial financing’ by the 
Government or Local Government as the term “substantially 
financed” in PTRI Act has been used for restricted bodies and 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
5 
the word ‘substantial’ even if taken in literal sense means 
solid and massive and the degree of finance involved therein 
must be actual, existing and positive in monetary terms; that 
the Commission has omitted to consider that 97 acres of the 
total lease land comprises of golf course, which is being 
maintained by the petitioner at its own expenses under the 
terms of lease and the petitioner is maintaining the golf course 
for the State by incurring huge expenses; that in the financial 
year 2021 alone Rs.40,632,212/- has been spent by the 
petitioner, for which the learned counsel has relied upon 
annual report of the petitioner to substantiate this argument. 
Lastly, the learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted 
that the Commission has relied upon the case laws by the 
learned Courts of India without appreciating that the laws 
dealing with the Right to Information Act, 2005 (RIA 2005) is 
not in pari materia with PTRI Act, thus, the judgments relied 
by the Commission are not applicable. 
4.  
 On the other hand, Barrister Tayeeb Jan, 
learned Assistant Advocate General Punjab appearing for 
respondent No.1 has submitted that rule of ejusdem generis is 
not applicable to section 2(h)(iv) of PTRI Act as the words 
preceding “or other body” do not pertain to same genus or 
category; that even otherwise, “or other body substantially 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
6 
financed by the Government”, by no stretch of imagination 
can be confined, keeping in view the intent of the legislature, 
which is very clear even by literal and plain interpretation; 
that the principle of ejusdem generis is not applicable to the 
case in hand in view of the law enunciated by the Honourable 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in case titled “Government of 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa through Chief Secretary, Peshawar and 
others versus Intizar Ali and others” (2022 SCMR 472), as 
the intent of legislature is manifestly clear from the wording 
of the statute, therefore, the same requires that such law is to 
be interpreted by assigning ordinary English meanings and 
usage of the words chosen by the legislature; applying the rule 
of ejusdem generis, as claimed by the learned counsel for the 
petitioner, will result into absurd situation. In this regard, 
learned Law Officer has relied upon cases titled “Federation 
of Pakistan through Secretary M/o Petroleum and Natural 
Resources and another versus Durrani Ceramics and others” 
(2014 SCMR 1630) and “Syed Mukhtar Hussain Shah  versus 
Mst. Saba Imtiaz and others” (PLD 2011 SC 260). The 
learned Law Officer has further argued that word 
“substantially” essentially means materially and it does not 
necessarily required to have domain of major portion or more 
than fifty percent; that by providing State (nazul) land of 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
7 
117.07 acre at the rate of Rs.5,000/- per annum, the 
Government is “substantially financing” the petitioner, 
therefore, the same falls within the scope of section 2(h)(iv) of 
PTRI Act; that word “substantially” is not synonymous with 
dominant or majority rather it is closer to word material or 
important and when this word is read in context, the object of 
the legislature becomes very clear. Learned Law Officer has 
relied upon various judgments including the decision of the 
Karnataka High Court in case titled as “Bangalore Turf Club 
Limited versus State Information Commissioner” (W.P. 
No.18449 of 2015) and decision of the Delhi High Court in 
case titled “Ifci Ltd. versus Ravinder Balwani” (W.P. No.4596 
of 2007) as well as the definition of ‘substantial’ given in 
Black’s Law dictionary and other English dictionaries. 
5.  
 Mr. Azhar Siddique, learned counsel for 
respondents and Mr. Abdullah Malik, learned Advocate have 
also opposed the petition, while relying upon cases titled 
“Province of Punjab versus Qaiser Iqbal and others” (PLD 
2018 Lahore 198), “Watan Party and others versus 
Federation of Pakistan and others” (PLD 2012 Supreme 
Court 292) and “Dr. Shahid Masood and others versus 
Federation of Pakistan and others” (2010 SCMR 1849). It is 
contended that Article 19-A of the Constitution of Islamic 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
8 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973, envisages every citizen of the 
Country to become independent of power center and to have 
access to information in all matters of public importance; that 
there are rights of every citizen to have access to information 
in all matters of public importance as guaranteed by the 
Article 19-A of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973, thus, any measure which directly or indirectly 
could restraint on or curtails access to information, is to be 
avoided. 
6.  
I have heard the arguments of learned counsel of 
the parties and perused the documents, available on the file, 
with their able assistance.   
7.  
It is appropriate to start with the contention of 
Barrister Rafey that grant by the Government of the State 
(nazul) land comprising of 117.07 Acres on lease to the 
petitioner does not amount to “substantially financed” and 
such facility neither qualify to be ‘finance’ nor is it 
‘substantial’ in nature within the meaning of section 2(h) of 
PTRI Act. The relevant part of this definition section is as 
follows: 
2(h)"public body" means- 
(i) 
a department, attached department, 
autonomous or semiautonomous body of the 
Government, a company of the Government 
or a special institution; 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
9 
(ii) a local government constituted under 
the Punjab Local Government Act 2013 
(XVIII of 2013) or any other law for the 
time being in force; 
(iii) Secretariat of Governor of the Punjab; 
(iv) any court, tribunal, office, Board, 
Commission, Council, or other body 
substantially 
financed 
by 
the 
Government, 
(v) Provincial Assembly of the Punjab  
(vi) statutory body established under a 
provincial law, and 
(vii) 
a 
non-government 
organization 
substantially financed by the Government 
or a local government, 
 
 
 
 
 
   (Emphasis supplied) 
8. 
Perusal of lease deed dated 12.06.1996 reflects 
that land measuring one thousand thirty kanal, one marla, 
eighty feet situated in mauza Mian Mir at Upper Shahrah-e-
Quaid-e-Azam (Upper Mall), Lahore has been granted to the 
petitioner on lease for fifty years from 01.04.2000 to 
31.03.2050 merely against token rent of Rs. 5,000/- (rupees 
five thousand only), per annum. This land exists in one of the 
most premium and expensive area of Lahore. The 
Commission has roughly assessed the value of the lease land 
as more than fifteen (15) billion rupees, which is not denied 
by the petitioner before this Court. The sports grounds 
including golf course and other facilities being provided by 
the petitioner to its members exist on the land that is granted 
by Government of the Punjab to the petitioner almost free of 
cost. The argument from the petitioner side that massive 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
10 
amount is being spent by the petitioner to maintain the golf 
course for the Province of Punjab has no substance as these 
facilities on the leased land are the reason for the people to 
have membership of the petitioner-club from where these 
expenses are being incurred or these maintenance charges are 
being paid. The leased land forms part of the resources of the 
State. The grant of leasehold rights of the land which is worth 
billions of rupees for almost free of cost by Government of 
the Punjab is an enormous benefit to the recipient / the 
petitioner. This accommodation, by the Government of 
providing one thousand thirty kanal one marla eighty feet land 
situated at Upper Mall, Lahore to the petitioner at the rate of 
Rs.5,000/- per annum which cannot be even termed as any 
rate whatsoever and the land is question that otherwise has 
rental value having no comparison with what is being fetched 
from the petitioner, clearly amounts to financial assistance by 
the Government.    
9. 
The word “financed” used in section 2(h)(iv) and 
(vii) ibid is qualified by the word “substantially”. Not every 
financial support or accommodation falls within the above 
definition unless it satisfies that the same amounts to 
‘substantial’.  The words ‘substantial’ or ‘substantially’ are 
not defined in PTRI Act. When a particular word is not 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
11 
defined in a statute then in order to interpret the same or to 
understand the intention of legislature, the elementary 
principle recognized by the Honourable Supreme Court of 
Pakistan is to give such words plain dictionary meanings, 
unless it results into some absurdity or the same renders the 
word(s) or part of the statute as superfluous. Reference can be 
made to the cases titled “Muhammad Ijaz-ul-Haq Versus 
Executive District Officer and Others”(2006 SCMR 989), 
“Federation of Pakistan through Secretary M/o Petroleum 
and Natural Resources and another” (supra) and “Syed 
Mukhtar Hussain Shah” (supra). The word ‘substantially’ in 
Concise Oxford English Dictionary (twelfth edition) is 
defined as ‘to a great significant extent or for most part; 
essentially’. The word ‘substantial’ in the Chambers 
Dictionary (twelfth Edition) is defined as having “substance; 
being a substance; essential; actually existing; real; 
corporeal, material; solid; stable; solidly based; durable; 
enduring; firm, stout, strong; considerable in amount; bulky; 
well-to-do, wealthy, influential”. As per Concise Oxford 
English Dictionary (twelfth edition), the word “substantial” 
means “considerable important, size or worth; strongly built 
or made; important in material or social terms; wealthy; 
concerning the essentials of something or real tangible rather 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
12 
than imaginary”. The Delhi High Court in case titled “Ifci 
Ltd. vs Ravinder Balwani” (W.P. (C) 4596/2007) while 
defining the words “substantially financed” concluded as 
follows: 
 
“….Therefore 
the 
word 
substantial 
is 
not 
synonymous with dominant or majority. It is closer to 
"material" or "important" or "of considerable 
value." "Substantially" is closer to "essentially". 
Both words can signify varying degrees depending 
on the context. In the context of the RTI Act it 
would be sufficient to demonstrate that the 
financing 
of 
the 
body 
by 
the 
appropriate 
government is not insubstantial. 
24. In Indian Olympic Association v. Veeresh Malik 
[judgment dated 7th January 2010 in W.P. (C) No. 876 
of 2007] the learned Single Judge of this Court was 
examining whether the Indian Olympic Association, 
the Sanskriti School and the Organising Committee 
Commonwealth Games 2010, Delhi were public 
authorities under the RTI Act. While answering that 
question in the affirmative, it was held as under (para 
58): 
"This court therefore, concludes that what 
amounts to "substantial financing cannot be 
straight-jacketed 
into 
rigid 
formulae, 
of 
universal application. Of necessity, each case 
would have to be examined on its own facts. 
That the percentage of funding is no "majority" 
financing, or that the body is an impermanent 
one, are not material. Equally, that the 
institution or organization is not controlled, and 
is autonomous is irrelevant; indeed, the concept 
of non-government organization means that it is 
independent of any manner of government 
control in its establishment, or management. 
That the organization does not perform - or pre-
dominantly perform--"public" duties too, may 
not be material, as long as the object for 
funding is achieving a felt need of a section of 
the public, or to secure larger societal goals. To 
the extent of such funding, indeed, the 
organization may be a tool, or vehicle for the 
executive government’s policy fulfillment plan." 
 
(Emphasis Supplied) 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
13 
10. 
 
The Karnataka High Court, while deciding case 
titled “Bangalore Turf Club Limited versus State Information 
Commissioner” (W.P.No.18449 of 2015) as well as Writ 
petitions No. 38347 of 2013, 58192 of 2013, 8053 of 2015 and 
22774 of 2015, has observed that the word substantial does not 
necessarily have to mean a major portion or more than fifty 
percent. It has also been observed that if a land in a city is given 
free of cost or on heavy discount the same falls within the 
meaning of substantial. Barrister Tayeeb Jan, learned Law 
Officer has also relied upon the decision of the Delhi High 
Court in case titled “Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Private 
Limited vs Hatim Ali & Anr.” (W.P. (C) 3110/2011 & CM 
6577/2011, wherein the following has been observed:- 
36. The Supreme Court in Thalappalam (supra) 
observed as under:- 
“The word ‘substantially’ has been defined to 
mean ‘in substance; as a substantially thing or 
being; essentially, intrinsically’. Therefore the 
word ‘substantial’ is not synonymous with 
‘dominant’ or ‘majority’. It is closer to 
‘material’ or ‘important’ or ‘of considerable 
value’. ‘Substantially’ is closer to ‘essentially’. 
Both words can signify varying degrees 
depending on the context. 
38. Merely providing subsidiaries, grants, 
exemptions, privileges etc., as such, cannot be 
said to be providing funding to a substantial 
extent, unless the record shows that the funding 
was so substantial to the body which practically 
runs by such funding and but for such funding, 
it would struggle to exist.” 
37. Applying the aforesaid principles to the facts of the 
present case, it would be seen that the undertakings of 
the petitioner had been funded, to a significant extent, 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
14 
by the Central Government...”.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Underlining is added) 
11. 
 
The plain dictionary meaning of the words 
‘substantial’ and ‘substantially’ as well as reading of word 
‘substantially’ in the context of the relevant provision leave 
hardly any doubt that it is not necessary to measure the 
financing in percentage and the contribution of Government is 
not required to be more than fifty percent or having major 
portion or dominant and majority part but it is sufficient if the 
financial assistance is material and important or when such 
contribution is fairly large and it is having essential role in 
existence of an entity / body. The financial assistance, in shape 
of leasehold rights of massive land in the most premium locality 
of Lahore for negligible amount, is not just fairly large but at 
the same time the petitioner has failed to bring anything on 
record against the finding of the Commission that the 
contribution of the Government in shape of leased land is so 
substantial for the petitioner that without such accommodation 
by the Government the petitioner practically would struggle to 
exist, which is envisaged by PTRI Act as ‘substantially 
financed’.   
12.  
 Taking up the next stance of the petitioner that 
the Commission fell to an error while failing to construe the 
words “or other body” in violation of rules of ejusdem generis 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
15 
and by giving the same wider meanings than intended by the 
legislature. The general word if followed by specific words of 
the same nature is presumed to be restricted to the same genus 
as those in the specific words, however, if the statute shows 
that wider sense is intended or there are provisions in the 
statute which reflect that certain other categories are included 
out of the suggested genus, the rule of ejusdem generis does 
not apply. In case titled “Don Basco High School versus The 
Assistant Director, E.O.B.I. and others” (PLD 1989 SC 128), 
the Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan while dealing with 
the rule of ejusdem generis has clearly observed that the said 
rule of construction is applicable, to construe the general word 
followed by specific words, only when the intention to 
contrary is not reflected. It will be advantageous to reproduce 
the following extract from the Don Basco High School case 
(supra):-  
   
“According 
to 
‘Maxwell 
on 
the 
Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edition, page 297, 
it is a well-established rule in the construction of 
statutes that “general terms following particular 
ones apply only to such persons or things as are 
ejusdem generis with those comprehended in the 
language of the Legislature; R. V.  Cleworth 
(1864) 4 B. & S. 927, per Cockburn C.J. at 932. 
In other words, the general expression is to be 
read as comprehending only things of the same 
kind as that designated by the preceding 
particular 
expressions, 
unless 
there 
is 
something to show that a wider sense was 
intended”. Reference is made by the author to R. 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
16 
v. Edwardson (1859) 28 L.J.M.C. 213). 
  
According to Corpus Juris Secundum, 
Volume 82, page 658, the rule or doctrine of 
‘ejusdem generis’ will apply unless intention to 
the contrary is clearly shown. The relevant 
passage may be quoted here. It reads: 
“Where 
general 
words 
follow 
the 
enumeration of particular classes of 
persons or things, the general words, 
under the rule or maxim of construction 
known as ‘ejusdem generis.’ will be 
construed as applicable only to persons or 
things of the same general nature or class 
as those enumerated, unless an intention to 
the 
contrary 
is 
clearly 
shown.” 
(underlining is ours) 
 
J.G.  Sutherland, in his book ‘Statutes and 
Statutory Construction’, (Third Edition) in 
section 4910, at page 400 has stated that the 
doctrine applies when the following five 
conditions exist: 
 
(1) 
the statute contains an enumeration by 
specific words; 
(2) 
the members of the enumeration constitute 
a class; 
(3) 
the class is not exhausted by the 
enumeration; 
(4) 
a general term follows the enumeration; 
and  
(5) 
there is not clearly manifested an intent 
that the general term be given a broader 
meaning than the doctrine requires.” 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
13.  
 The ratio of the above case was further 
followed by the Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan in 
case titled “Jamat-i-Islami Pakistan through Syed Munawar 
Hassan Secretary General versus Federation of Pakistan 
through Secreatry, Law Justice and Parliamentary Affairs” 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
17 
(PLD 2000 Supreme Court 111). In cases titled “Amar 
Chandra Chakraborty versus Collector of Excise Government 
of Tripura and others” (1972 AIR 1863) and “Grasim 
Industries Ltd. versus Collector of Customs, Bombay” 
(Appeal (Civil) 1951 of 1998), the Supreme Court of India 
has observed that the rule of ejusdem generis is applicable to 
reconcile incompatibility between the specific and general 
words in view of other rules of interpretation that all words in 
a statute are given effect if possible and that a statute is to be 
construed as a whole and no word in statute should be 
presumed superfluous; that the rule is applicable only when 
there is no indication of a different legislative intent. The 
following part of the judgment of “Grasim Industries Ltd. 
(supra) is relevant:-  
“…In such a case the general words are construed 
as limited to things of the same kind as those 
specified. The rule reflects an attempt to reconcile 
incompatibility between the specific and general 
words in view of the other rules of interpretation 
that all words in a statute are given effect if 
possible, that a statute is to be construed as a 
whole and that no words in a statute are presumed 
to be superfluous. The rule applies only when (1) 
the statute enumerates the specific words, (2) the 
subjects of enumeration constitute a class or 
category, (3) that class or category is not 
exhausted by the enumeration, (4) the general 
terms follow the enumeration and (5) there is no 
indication of a different legislative intent. If the 
subjects of enumeration belong to a broad based 
genus, as also to a narrower genus there is no 
principle that the general words should be confined 
to the narrower genus…...” 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
18 
14.  
 PTRI Act has been promulgated by the 
legislature in order to confirm transparency and to provide 
freedom of information to ensure that the citizens have 
improved 
access 
to 
public 
information; 
to 
enforce 
fundamental right of the citizens to have access to information 
in all matters of public importance and to provide assistance 
for ancillary matters. One of the main purposes of PTRI Act is 
to make Government of the Punjab more accountable to the 
citizens.  
15.  
Furthermore, section 22 of PTRI Act reads as 
follows:- 
    
“22.  Interpretation: - This Act, the rules 
and regulations shall be interpreted so as 
to advance the purposes of this Act and to 
facilitate and encourage, promptly and at 
the lowest reasonable cost, the disclosure 
of 
information 
and 
effective 
implementation of right to information.” 
    
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
Reading of above section, preamble of the statute 
and referring to its object make it amply clear that the 
legislature envisioned the interpretation of the provisions of 
PTRI Act to advance its purpose of making the Government 
more accountable to the citizens as well as to facilitate and 
encourage the disclosure of information for effective 
implementation of right to information in all matters of public 
importance. The legislature has already created the 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
19 
exceptions, in section 13 of PTRI Act, for the circumstances or 
incidences or for the bodies where undue disclosure of 
information is likely to cause any harm or when in the 
wisdom of legislature such disclosure is not required. The 
words ‘or other body’ are followed by the words 
“substantially financed by the Government”, which also 
shows the clear object of legislation to include all the bodies, 
which are precisely mentioned in section 2(h)(iv) of PTRI Act 
or those other bodies which are not specifically mentioned but 
substantially financed by the Government, enabling the 
citizens to do accountability of the Government for the 
utilization of its resources, subject to exceptions given in 
PTRI Act as well as subject to regulation and reasonable 
restrictions imposed by other laws as contemplated in Article 
19-A of the Constitution. In “Government of Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa through Chief Secretary” case (supra), the 
Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan has observed that 
when the meaning of statute is clear and plain language 
requires no other interpretation then intention of legislature 
conveyed through such language has to be given full effect 
and the intention of law maker when manifestly clear from the 
enactment itself, rule of interpretation requires that such law is 
to be interpreted in ordinary meanings unless it causes grave 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
20 
injustice or it leads to absurdity, which is always presumed to 
be not intended by the legislature.  In view of the above 
discussed clear intent of the legislature, the argument of 
Barrister Rafey Zeeshan Altaf, learned counsel for the 
petitioner that rule of ejusdem generis limits meaning of 
words “or other body” to the category preceding the same in 
section 2(h)(iv) of PTRI Act and it excludes the petitioner 
from the scope of Act, is not acceptable, thus, rejected. 
16.  
 
The learned counsel for the petitioner has next 
argued that section 2(h) of PTRI Act, wherein “public body” is 
defined, starts with the word “means”, which reflects that the 
list contained therein is exhaustive in nature. However, there is 
no denial by the respondents of the fact that the list of the 
public bodies contained in section 2(h) of PTRI Act is 
exhaustive list but the imperative question remained that a body 
or institution that is ‘substantially financed by the Government’ 
is part of the list contained in the said definition clause and 
since the petitioner squarely falls within one of the category  
given therein (i.e. section 2(h)(vii)), thus, the argument as to 
whether this list is exhaustive or not, is of no help to the 
petitioner.   
17. 
 
For what has been discussed above, I am of the 
considered view that the order dated 08.11.2022 passed by the 

W.P. No.73648 of 2022  
 
21 
Commission does not suffer from any illegality. Consequently, 
the present petition as well as the connected petitions are 
dismissed. No order as to costs.  
 
         (SULTAN TANVIR AHMAD) 
        JUDGE 
 
Approved for reporting  
JUDGE 
Announced in the open Court on _________ 
 
                    JUDGE 
J.A Hashmi 
 
 
 
 

