StereoHCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.65818 of 2020. 
 
Safdar Iqbal Chaudhry. 
Versus 
Chief Operating Officer, 
Technical Education & 
Vocation 
Training 
Authority 
(TEVTA) 
& 
others 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
Date of hearing: 
05.06.2023. 
 
Petitioner by: 
Mr. Masood Ahmad Zafar, Advocate. 
 
Respondents by: 
Rana 
Shamshad 
Khan, 
Additional 
Advocate-General. 
 
Mr. Umair Shahid, Advocate, for TEVTA. 
 
 
Shujaat Ali Khan, J:- Through this single judgment I 
intend to decide W.P. No.65818 of 2020 (this petition) as well 
as W.P. No.17823 of 2023 (connected petition) having 
commonality of law and facts. 
2. 
Unnecessary details apart, the facts, forming factual 
canvass of this petition are that the petitioner, while serving as 
Chief Instructor (BS-19), was transferred from Government 
College of Technology, Raiwind Road, Lahore to Government 
College of Technology, Multan, vide order, dated 12.07.2012, 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--2-- 
 
against which he filed W.P.No.19449 of 2012 before this Court, 
wherein the operation of transfer order of the petitioner was 
suspended, vide order, dated 17.08.2012 and the said Writ 
Petition was finally decided through order, dated 19.11.2015. 
Since during subsistence of injunctive order, the petitioner was 
again transferred from Government College of Technology, 
Raiwind Road, Lahore to Government College of Technology, 
Railway Road, Lahore vide order, dated 28.05.2013, he was 
constrained to file W.P.No.19022 of 2013 before this Court, 
which was disposed of with the direction to the relevant 
authority to decide the matter within two weeks. Pursuant to 
order of this Court, the Competent Authority decided the matter 
through order, dated 04.06.2015, against which the petitioner 
filed W.P.No.24178 of 2015 before this Court. Simultaneously, 
departmental proceedings were initiated against the petitioner 
qua allegation of misconduct on account of absence from duty. 
The Inquiry Officer submitted its inquiry report recommending 
imposition of certain penalty against the petitioner. On receipt 
of inquiry report, the Competent Authority appointed Hearing 
Officer, who submitted his report, dated 20.03.2018. The Chief 
Minister, being Competent Authority, disagreed with the 
inquiry report as well as report of the Hearing Officer and 
ordered for denovo inquiry against the petitioner but before 
finalization of the denovo proceedings petitioner superannuated 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--3-- 
 
on 30.04.2020. As a result, the said proceedings stood abated, 
factum whereof was also incorporated in order, dated 
08.03.2023, passed by this Court in W.P.No.64860 of 2022, 
filed by the petitioner challenging the act of the departmental 
authorities 
towards 
continuation 
of 
the 
departmental 
proceedings against him, despite his superannuation. The Chief 
Operating Officer, Technical Education & Vocational Training 
Authority 
(TEVTA) 
(respondent 
No.1), 
while 
issuing 
retirement Notification of the petitioner on 04.12.2020, ordered 
to withhold Rs.37,73,122/- from his pensionary emoluments till 
the decision of denovo inquiry/Public Accounts Committee 
Audit Para, in terms of rule 1.8 of the Punjab Civil Services 
Pension Rules, 1963 (“the Pension Rules, 1963”). Being 
aggrieved of said Notification, the petitioner has filed this 
petition.  
3. 
Insofar as factual background of connected petition is 
concerned, the petitioner has assailed the vires of letter, dated 
17.01.2023, issued by respondent No.2, whereby it was 
conveyed that the inquiry pending against the petitioner under 
the 
Punjab 
Employees 
Efficiency, 
Discipline 
and 
Accountability Act, 2006 (“the PEEDA Act, 2006”) was 
converted into an inquiry under rule 1.8(a) of the Pension 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--4-- 
 
Rules, 1963. He has also assailed the validity of letters, dated 
09.03.2023 and 10.03.2023, asking him to appear for inquiry.  
4. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that since the 
petitioner superannuated from service on 30.042020, no 
proceedings could continue for more than two years after his 
retirement from service as contemplated under section 21 of the 
PEEDA Act, 2006; that continuation of departmental 
proceedings, against the petitioner despite his superannuation, 
speaks volumes about the mala fide conduct of the respondents; 
that disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the 
petitioner on account of alleged absence from duty, thus, the 
same could not be converted into proceeding under rule 1.8(a) 
of the Pension Rules, 1963, hence the entire proceedings are 
coram-non-judice; that since the operation of the transfer order, 
issued in the year 2012, was suspended by this Court and the 
injunctive order inured till the year 2015, the petitioner could 
not be treated as absent from duty and that even if the 
proceedings against the petitioner were to be conducted under 
rule 1.8 ibid, the departmental authorities could not withhold 
more than 20% of the due pension of the petitioner but the 
amount withheld by respondent No.2, being much more than 
the one stipulated under rule 1.8 ibid, is not justified. Relies on 
Province of Punjab through Conservator of Forest, Faisalabad 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--5-- 
 
and others v. Javed Iqbal (2021 SCMR 328), Chief Manager, 
Staff Bank of Pakistan and 2 others v. Ghulam Rasool and 
others (2011 SCMR 313), Province of the Punjab through 
Secretary, Livestock and Dairy Development Department, 
Punjab, Lahore and others v. Syed Munir Hussain Shah (199 
SCMR 1326), Hafiz Muhammad Kaleem ud din v. Province of 
Punjab and others (2022 PLC (C.S.) 999), Khalid Imran Khan 
Barki v. Government of Punjab and others (2021 PLC (C.S.) 
426), Masood Khan and another v. Federation of Pakistan 
through Chairman Federal Board of Revenue, Islamabad and 
another (2021 PLC (C.S.) 1540), Irshad Hussain v. Municipal 
Corporation Multan through Mayor and 3 others (2019 PLC 
(C.S.) 1203), Mrs. Riffat Sattar v. Government of the Punjab 
through Secretary and 6 others (2016 PLC (C.S.) 472), 
Secretary, Government of Punjab, Finance Department and 
269 others v. M. Ismail Tayer and 269 others (2015 PLC (C.S.) 
296), Ehsan-ul-Haque v. Executive Engineer, Ahmadpur Canal 
Division Ahmadpur East and 2 others (2011 PLC (C.S.) 1523), 
Noor Ahmad Shah v. Government of N.W.F.P. through 
Secretary Education and 5 others (2003 PLC (C.S.) 1400) and 
Muhammad Masood Joya v. Government of Punjab and others 
(PLJ 2000 Lahore 244). 
5. 
Learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the respondents-

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--6-- 
 
TEVTA, states that the petitioner being civil servant could not 
approach this Court under Article 199 of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (the Constitution) in view of 
the embargo contained under Article 212 of the Constitution; 
that since the Show Cause Notice, subject matter of the 
connected petition, has been issued under rule 1.8(a) of the 
Pension Rules, 1963, reliance of learned counsel for the 
petitioner on rule 1.8(b) is irrelevant; that there is no cavil with 
the fact that in view of section 21 of the PEEDA Act, 2006, the 
departmental proceedings initiated against a retiree cannot 
continue after two years of his retirement but no limitation 
having been provided to initiate proceedings under rule 1.8 ibid, 
the impugned proceedings are totally justified; that to claim full 
pension, good conduct on the part of a government servant 
during service as well as after retirement is sine-qua-non, hence 
no exception can be taken against the proceedings, subject 
matter of these petitions; that a line of distinction has been 
drawn by the Apex Court of the country between the 
proceedings under rule 1.8(a) ibid and those under rule 1.8(b) 
ibid, no interference is called for by this Court and that since 
the petitioner remained absent from duty for more than two and 
a half years, he does not deserve any leniency. Relies on Chief 
Secretary, Government of Punjab, Lahore and others v. Ms. 
Shamim Usman (2021 SCMR 1390), Ali Azhar Khan Baloch 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--7-- 
 
and others v. Province of Sindh and others (2015 SCMR 
456), Taj Muhammad Afridi v. Principal Secretary to the 
President Secretariat and others (2011 SCMR 1111), The 
Government of N.W.F.P. through the Secretary to the 
Government 
of 
N.W.F.P. 
Communications 
and 
Works 
Departments, Peshawar v. Mohammad Said Khan and another 
(PLD 1973 S.C. 514) and Muhammad Nawaz v. Ghulam 
Mustafa Ansari and 7 others (PLD 2009 Lahore 467). 
6. 
Learned Law Officer, while supporting the arguments 
advanced by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondents-TEVTA, states that the verdict of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan rendered in the case of The 
Government of N.W.F.P. through the Secretary to the 
Government of N.W.F.P. (supra) has been reiterated by it in its 
recent judgment reported as Federation of Pakistan through 
General Manager/Operations Pakistan Railways, Headquarters 
Office, Lahore and others v. Shah Mohammad (2021 SCMR 
1249), thus, no contrary view can be formed by this Court; that 
question of pension being part of terms and condition of service 
of a government servant, this Court lacks jurisdiction to 
adjudicate upon the said issue and that since the departmental 
proceedings initiated against the petitioner could not reach their 
logical conclusion due to filing of different proceedings by the 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--8-- 
 
petitioner, thus, he cannot be allowed to take premium of the 
same at this stage.  
7. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner, while exercising his 
right of rebuttal, submits that since the petitioner has already 
retired from government service, the bar contained under 
Article 212 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973, does not impede his way to approach this Court.  
8. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at 
considerable length and have also gone through the documents, 
appended with this petition, as well as the case-law cited at the 
bar. 
9. 
Firstly taking up the objection raised by learned counsel, 
appearing on behalf of the respondents-TEVTA against 
maintainability of this petition, I am of the view that since no 
final order has been passed against the petitioner, he cannot 
approach the Punjab Service Tribunal as urged by learned Law 
Officer as well as learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent-TEVTA, rather the petitioner being remediless has 
only option to approach this Court. Reliance in this regard is 
placed on the cases reported as Umer Daraz v. Additional 
Sessions Judge and others (2021 MLD 2077) and Finance 
Department, Azad Government of the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir, through Secretary Finance, Civil Secretariat, 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--9-- 
 
Chatter Domail, Muzaffarabad v. Mahboob Ahmed Awan 
(2020 PLC (C.S) 741).  
 
It is important to observe over here that in routine, Writ 
Petition against issuance of Show Cause Notice is not 
maintainable, however, where the Show Cause Notice has 
been issued in violation of the law on the subject, the same 
can be challenged in Writ Petition as held in the cases 
reported as Commissioner Inland Revenue and others v. 
Jahangir Khan Tareen and others (2022 SCMR 92), 
Jahangir Muggo and others v. Securities and Exchange 
Commission of Pakistan and others (2022 CLD 1325), 
Pakistan Telecommunication Company Limited v. Federation 
of Pakistan through Ministry of Information and others (2021 
CLC 159), Reliance Commodities (Private) Ltd. v. 
Federation of Pakistan and others (PLD 2020 Lahore 632) 
and Dr. Fatima Arshad v. Government of the Punjab and 
others (2020 PLC (C.S.) 688). 
If the objection raised by learned Law Officer as well as learned 
counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-TEVTA, is 
considered in the light of the afore-referred judgments, there 
leaves no ambiguity that the same hardly holds any water, 
therefore, the same is accordingly spurned.  

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--10-- 
 
10. 
Now reverting to the merits of the case, I have noted that 
firstly the petitioner was transferred from Government College 
of Technology, Raiwind Road, Lahore to Government College 
of Technology, Multan, vide order, dated 12.07.2012, against 
which he filed W.P.No.19449 of 2012, which came up for 
preliminary hearing on 17.08.2012 when this Court while 
issuing notice to the respondents suspended the operation of the 
transfer order and the said injunctive order remained intact till 
the final decision of said Writ Petition on 19.11.2015. In this 
backdrop, the petitioner could not be considered absent from 
duty merely for the reason that he did not join Government 
College of Technology, Multan, pursuant to order, dated 
12.07.2012.  
11. 
During the course of arguments learned counsel 
representing TEVTA took specific plea that since the petitioner 
remained absent from duty for two and a half years he was 
guilty of gross misconduct. A cursory glance over the Charge 
Sheet issued against the petitioner shows that under Charge at 
Sr.No.3, it was inter alia alleged that he remained absent from 
duty from 06.06.2015 to 14.12.2015 meaning thereby that 
period of absence was not so long as alleged by the learned 
counsel appearing on behalf of TEVTA. Moreover, admittedly 
W.P. No.19449 of 2012 was dismissed by this Court on 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--11-- 
 
19.11.2015, thus, the petitioner could not be treated as absent 
from duty from 06.06.2015 to 19.11.2015. This Court is 
cognizant of the fact that though it has been alleged in the 
Charge, under discussion, that the petitioner unlawfully 
received salary for the period from 01.06.2013 to 14.12.2015 
but it was not alleged that the petitioner remained absent from 
duty for the said period. Moreover, learned counsel for TEVTA 
failed to convince this court that if the petitioner was not 
entitled to salary for the period, referred supra, as to why the 
same was paid to him and as to why departmental action was 
not taken against the officials/officers who were involved in 
alleged unlawful payment of salary to the petitioner. 
12. 
It is pertinent to mention over here that in Charge at 
Serial No.2 of the Charge Sheet it was alleged that instead of 
complying with the transfer order, the petitioner resorted to file 
various Writ Petitions before this court, which prima facie 
stands proof of the fact that departmental authorities, being 
annoyed with the petitioner on account of filing proceedings 
before this court, put up the matter before the competent 
authority for initiation of disciplinary proceedings against the 
petitioner despite the fact that availing of legal remedy by an 
aggrieved employee does not entail any departmental action.  

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--12-- 
 
13. 
It is very astonishing to note that on the one hand the 
respondents have adopted the plea that while proceeding against 
the petitioner they acted fairly but on the other with a view to 
nullify the effect of the injunctive order, issued by this Court in 
W.P.No.19449 of 2012, they issued another order, dated 
28.05.2013, transferring the petitioner from Government 
College of Technology, Raiwind Road, Lahore to Government 
College of Technology, Railway Road, Lahore. This fact alone 
is sufficient to establish that instead of honouring the order, 
passed by this Court, the respondents were all out to displace 
the petitioner from Government College of Technology, 
Raiwind Road, Lahore. In this scenario, it is not a simple matter 
of disciplinary proceedings against a government servant rather 
the same seems to be tainted with mala fide.  
14. 
It is admitted position that till the superannuation of the 
petitioner, the departmental proceedings, initiated against him 
inter-alia on account of absence from duty, could not reach 
their logical conclusion as the Competent Authority while 
disagreeing with the recommendations of the Inquiry Officer as 
well as Hearing Officer, ordered for denovo inquiry but before 
completion of the said inquiry, the petitioner superannuated. 
According to Fundamental Rule 54-A, the departmental 
proceedings, pending against a government servant, stand 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--13-- 
 
abated in the event of his retirement from government service. 
The said analogy has also been endorsed by the superior Courts 
in the cases reported as Muhammad Zaheer Khan v. 
Government Of Pakistan through Secretary, Establishment and 
others 
(2010 
SCMR 
1554), 
Deputy 
Director, 
Food, 
Bahawalpur and others v. Akhtar Ali and others (1998 SCMR 
597), Nasir Kamal v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, 
Ministry of Maritime Affairs, Islamabad (2021 PLC (C.S) 
1226) and Syed Anwar Ali Shah v. Zarai Tarqiati Bank Ltd. 
(2021 PLC (C.S) 662). 
15. 
During the course of arguments, learned counsel, 
appearing on behalf of the respondent-TEVTA, while justifying 
proceedings initiated against the petitioner, took specific plea 
that where misconduct on behalf of a retiree during service or 
after retirement is established, he can be proceeded against 
under rule 1.8 ibid. There is no cavil with the fact that the 
Competent Authority can proceed against a retiree if he is found 
involved in any activity prejudicial to good conduct of a 
government servant/retiree but I never came across any 
precedent where even after retirement, after abating the 
disciplinary proceedings pending against a government servant 
the same were ever switched over to those under rule 1.8(a) 
ibid. The logic behind the said approach is that the departmental 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--14-- 
 
proceedings against a serving government servant and those 
against a retiree are governed under distinct laws/rules and they 
have no overlapping effect on each other. In a number of cases, 
the superior Courts have held that when law provides a specific 
mechanism to perform an act, the same cannot be allowed to be 
deviated by any authority but the conduct of the respondents, 
portrayed above, seems otherwise.  
16. 
It is also relevant to note that to initiate proceedings 
against a retiree under rule 1.8 ibid, it is condition precedent 
that the Competent Authority should prove misconduct on the 
part of a retiree. Insofar as the case in hand is concerned, 
learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the respondent-
TEVTA, has frankly conceded that the proceedings under rule 
1.8 have been initiated against the petitioner on account of his 
alleged absence from duty during service. At the cost of 
repetition, it is observed that since the operation of transfer 
order, issued against the petitioner was suspended by this Court 
vide order, dated 17.08.2012, non-joining of the petitioner at 
new place of posting did not entail any penal action at the hands 
of the Competent Authority. This Court has no sympathy with a 
person who is found involved in any activity which is 
prejudicial to the good conduct of a government servant but at 
the same time the departmental authorities cannot be allowed to 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--15-- 
 
unnecessarily engage government servants in departmental 
proceedings for years and years just to cause mental agony and 
keep them aloof from their financial rights/future service 
prospects. 
17. 
It is pertinent to mention over here that according to 
section 18 of the Punjab Civil Servants Act, 1974, a retiree has 
indefeasible right to pension on his retirement and the same can 
only be withheld upon fulfillment of the conditions enumerated 
under sub-section 3 of section 18. Learned counsel, 
representing the respondent-TEVTA was posed with the query 
for more than once that as to how gross misconduct, on the part 
of the petitioner, as envisaged under rule 1.8(a) ibid, is 
established but he has not been able to reply satisfactorily. 
Undeniably, the rules being subservient to the provisions of the 
parent statute cannot be given precedence over the latter. When 
none of the conditions postulated under section 18(3) of the 
Punjab Civil Servant Act, 1974 are attracted, respondents 
cannot be allowed to withhold the pensionary emoluments of 
the petitioner on the basis of untenable grounds.  
18. 
While addressing the Court, learned counsel, appearing 
on behalf of the respondent-TEVTA, specifically pleaded that 
the departmental proceedings, initiated against the petitioner, 
could not reach their logical conclusion due to filing of multiple 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--16-- 
 
proceedings by the petitioner before different fora including 
this Court. In this regard, I am of the view that admittedly the 
injunctive order, issued by this Court, stood discharged with the 
decision of W.P.No.19449 of 2012 on 19.11.2015 but 
departmental proceedings could not be concluded till 
20.04.2020 when the petitioner superannuated. It does not lie in 
the mouth of the respondents to claim that the departmental 
proceedings could not be completed against the petitioner due 
to issuance of an injunctive order by this Court.  
19. 
The resume of facts, narrated above, shows dismal 
picture of the inquiry proceedings initiated against the 
petitioner. Neither the departmental proceedings initiated 
against 
the 
petitioner 
were 
completed 
within 
the 
prescribed/extended period provided under the PEEDA Act, 
2006 nor has any reason been given for such unconscionable 
delay justifying conversion of departmental proceedings 
initiated under the PEEDA Act 2006 into those under rule 
1.8(a) ibid. If the proceedings under rule 1.8(a) ibid are allowed 
to be continued the petitioner would again be placed in square 
one despite lapse of more than seven years from the start of 
departmental proceedings against him.  
20. 
The continuation of departmental proceedings against a 
government servant for years and years without any fruitful 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--17-- 
 
result create panic among them which practice should not be 
approved rather deserves to be deprecated with full vigor. If the 
competent opts to initiate proceedings against an employee it 
should ensure that the same are taken to their logic end within 
the prescribed/extended period provided under the law instead 
of using the said proceedings as hanging sword to satisfy the 
personal vendetta.  
21. 
In this petition, the petitioner has assailed validity of 
Notification, dated 04.12.2020, which for convenience of 
reference is imaged below:- 
 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--18-- 
 
From the above imaged Notification, it is abundantly clear that 
retirement of the petitioner from service on account of 
superannuation w.e.f. 30.04.2020 was notified on 04.12.2020 
despite the fact that departmental authorities are bound to notify 
retirement of a government servant much prior to his date of 
retirement. This fact alone speaks volumes about mala-fide 
conduct of the respondents.  
22. 
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of TEVTA has 
repeatedly argued that since the petitioner did not perform any 
duty during pendency of his different Writ Petitions, he was not 
entitled to any salary and the amount paid to him is liable to be 
recovered. In this regard, I am of the view that when the 
operation of the transfer order of the petitioner was suspended 
by this court, the respondents could assign any duty to him at 
his existing place of posting but when they chose to keep the 
petitioner aloof from performance of any duty, with a view to 
portray him as shirker, the blame of non-performance of duty 
cannot be attributed to the petitioner rather the responsibility in 
that regard lies on the shoulders of the departmental authorities. 
At the cost of repetition, it is observed that mala fide conduct of 
the relevant authorities is also evinced from the fact that instead 
of honouring the order of this court they devised a plan to 
transfer the petitioner from his existing place of posting by 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--19-- 
 
issuing fresh transfer order, during subsistence of the interim 
relief granted by this court. The courts should jealously guard 
against disobedience of their orders and for that purpose they 
should take stern action against the persons involved in such 
activities. 
23. 
During the course of arguments, learned Law Officer as 
well as learned counsel representing the respondents-TEVTA 
put much emphasis on the case of The Government of N.W.F.P. 
through the Secretary to the Government of N.W.F.P. 
Communications and Works Departments, Peshawar (supra) to 
maintain that the Competent Authority enjoys unfettered 
powers to initiate proceedings against a retiree under rule 1.8 
ibid, notwithstanding the period elapsed after retirement. With 
due reverence to the Apex Court of the country, I am of the 
view that the said case is quite distinguishable from the facts 
and circumstances of the present case inasmuch as firstly, in the 
referred case departmental proceedings were not initiated 
against the government servants during their service and 
secondly the role attributed to them was gross negligence to 
supervise the construction of the subject bridge, which, by no 
stretch of imagination can be considered at par with the 
allegation of absence from duty which too stands justified in 
view of the injunctive order issued by this Court. While dilating 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--20-- 
 
upon the question relating to the powers of the Competent 
Authority to invoke penal provision of rule 1.8 ibid, the Apex 
Court of the country in the referred case inter-alia held as 
under:-   
“It must now be taken as well-settled that a person who 
enters Government service has also something to look 
forward after his retirement, to what are called 
retirement benefits, grant of pension being the most 
valuable of such benefits. It is equally well-settled that 
pension like salary of a civil servant is no longer a 
bounty but is a right acquired after putting in 
satisfactory service for the prescribed minimum period. 
A fortiori, it cannot be reduced or refused arbitrarily 
except to the extent and in the manner provided in the 
relevant rules. Conversely full pension admissible 
under the rules is not to be given as a matter of course 
unless the service rendered has been duly approved 
(See Art. 470, Civil Service Regulations). It is equally 
well settled that if the service has not been thoroughly 
satisfactory, the authority sanctioning the pension is 
empowered under the said Article to make such 
reduction in the amount as it may deem proper. This 
power is however exercisable only before pension is 
actually sanctioned.” (emphasis provided) 
Further, while drawing a line of distinction between clauses (a) 
& (b) of rule 1.8 ibid, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case, 
under discussion, has inter-alia concluded as under:- 
“A plain reading of both clauses (a) and (b) would 
however, make it at once clear that each clause is a 
self-contained and independent provision designed to 
cover two entirely different situations. Under clause (a) 
maintenance of "good conduct" is made an inseparable 
condition for the grant or continuance of pension to a 
Government servant and the Government reserves to 
itself plenary power to withhold or withdraw a pension 
or any part thereof if the pensioner is convicted for 
serious crime or found guilty of grave misconduct 
whether during or after completion of his service. The 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--21-- 
 
language of this clause is clear and does not admit of any 
doubt. This is also consistent with Article 470 of the Civil 
Service Regulations which provides that full pension 
admissible under the rules is not to be given as a matter 
of course unless the service rendered has been approved 
for pension. If the service has not been satisfactory, the 
authority sanctioning the pension is empowered to make 
such reduction in the amount as it thinks proper. 
However, clause (a) cannot be used to affect penal 
recovery if there is a case of fraud or negligence during 
the service though it may be made a ground for the 
finding that the service has not been thoroughly 
satisfactory. Clause (b) of rule 1.8 however appears to be 
a recent addition which corresponds to Art. 351-A, Civil 
Service Regulations, is of great importance. It empowers 
the Government to order recovery from the pension of 
the whole or any part of any pecuniary loss caused to 
the Government if the pensioner is found “in 
departmental or judicial proceedings” to have been 
guilty of grave misconduct or negligence during his 
service. 
 
Another important distinction between the two 
clauses is that under clause (b) the recovery will be only 
of a specified amount and for that reason the order will 
exhaust itself once the recovery is made. On the other 
hand any order made under clause (a) will depend upon 
the general quality of service rendered. It will reduce 
his pension for the remainder of his life and not for a 
particular period only or in respect of a specified sum 
as under clause (b). This clearly brings into sharp relief 
the different purposes for which clauses (a) and (b) 
have been framed.” (emphasis provided) 
A bird’s eye view over the afore-quoted portions from the 
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, referred 
by learned counsel representing the respondent-TEVTA, brings 
to limelight that if the Competent Authority opts to proceed 
against a retiree in terms of rule 1.8 ibid, it can do so before 
sanctioning the pension. Further it has been clarified that the 
said rule is only applicable when grave misconduct on the part 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--22-- 
 
of a retiree is established through departmental/judicial 
proceedings. Moreover, when a specific amount of recovery is 
involved the relevant authority can invoke clause (b) instead of 
clause (a). As far as the case in hand is concerned, admittedly 
the departmental authorities want to recover Rs.37,73,122/- 
allegedly paid to the petitioner during the period when he did 
not perform any duty, thus, clause (a) is inapplicable to his 
matter rather the department could start proceedings under 
clause (b) of rule 1.8 ibid. The petitioner cannot be held guilty 
of grave misconduct in absence of any proof in that regard and 
the continuation of proceedings against him under rule 1.8(a) 
ibid, would be an exercise in futility.  
24. 
Now coming to the case-law referred by the learned 
counsel representing TEVTA as well as learned Additional 
Advocate General, I am of the view that the same is 
inapplicable to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the 
present case inasmuch as in none of the referred cases 
proceedings under rule 1.8 ibid were initiated against a 
government servant while he was in service. Moreover, in the 
case of Chief Secretary, Government of Punjab, Lahore and 
others (supra) the matter revolved round the promotion of a 
civil servant which is not the position in the case in hand. 
Likewise, the question before the Hon’ble Supreme Court in  

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--23-- 
 
Ali Azhar Khan Baloch and others (supra) pertained to the 
out of turn promotion to the Police personnel which has no 
connectivity with the proposition involved in the present 
case. Similarly, the point of law thrashed by the Apex Court 
of country in Taj Muhammad Afridi (supra) related to period 
of limitation to file appeal before the Service Tribunal in a 
matter arising out of proceedings held under the Removal 
from Service (Special Powers) Ordinance, 2000 which stands 
poll apart from the question involved in the case in hand. The 
distinguishing features between the case of the petitioner and 
those discussed in the matter of The Government of N.W.F.P. 
through the Secretary to the Government of N.W.F.P. 
Communications and Works Departments, Peshawar (supra) 
have already been detailed in para 24-ante. Taking up the case 
of Muhammad Nawaz (supra) I am of the view that facts of the 
said case being quite distinct the same cannot be quoted as 
precedent in the present case. 
25. 
As a necessary corollary to the discussion made in the 
foregoing paragraphs, I have no hesitation to hold that 
departmental proceedings pending against the petitioner could 
not be converted into those under rule 1.8(a) ibid during service 
of the petitioner. Further, the conditions envisaged under rule 
1.8(a) are not attracted in the case of the petitioner. 

 
 
WP No.65818 of 2020. 
--24-- 
 
Consequently, this petition is accepted and impugned 
Notification to the extent of withholding of certain amount of 
the petitioner is declared illegal. Resultantly, it is directed that 
amount of Rs.37,73,122/- withheld from the pensionary 
emoluments of the petitioner be released immediately. 
26. 
Now taking up the connected petition, it is observed that 
when the conversion of departmental proceedings pending 
against the petitioner into those under rule 1.8(a) ibid has been 
declared illegal, the communications challenged therein cannot 
be allowed to hold field. Consequently, connected petition is 
also accepted and impugned letters are quashed. There shall be 
no order as to costs in both these petitions. 
 
Judge 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
Jamil* 

