StereoHCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023 
 
 
 Dr. Rehana Kausar           Versus.         Province of Punjab, etc. 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
Date of hearing: 31.05.2024. 
 
Petitioner by: 
Hafiz Tariq Nasim, Advocate. 
 
Respondents by: 
 
Rana Shamshad Khan, Additional Advocate 
General, 
Punjab 
for 
respondent 
No.1 
alongwith Mian Zahid, Law Officer, Higher 
Education Department. 
 
Mr. Gohar Mustafa Qureshi, Advocate for 
respondents No.2 to 4 assisted by Mr. Ali 
Ahmed Toor, Advocate. 
 
Shujaat Ali Khan, J: - Through this single judgment, I intend 
to decide W.P. No.57365/2023 (“this petition”) as well as Crl. Org. 
No.27444-W/2024 (“contempt petition”) having commonality of law 
and facts. 
2. 
Unnecessary details apart, the facts, as spelt out in this petition, 
are that pursuant to an advertisement got published by the Lahore 
College for Women University, Lahore (hereinafter to be referred 
as “the University”) for recruitment against two posts of Professor of 
Urdu (BS-21), the petitioner, along with one Dr. Rubab Azmat, 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--2-- 
 
 
 
applied against the said post. The Selection Board in its 55th meeting, 
held on 21.03.2018, interviewed said two applicants but did not find 
any of them fit for appointment. As a result, the Selection Board 
recommended to re-advertise the subject post. In the light of decision 
of the Selection Board, the University again advertised two posts of 
Professor of Urdu (BS-21), on 23.09.2018. According to the internal 
evaluation and remarks of the Director Research, the petitioner, along 
with Dr. Azmat Rubab, were declared eligible for the said post. 
Resultantly, their cases were put up before the Sub-Committee of the 
Selection Board. The Sub-Committee suggested that the previous 
external evaluation of both the candidates, which was conducted 
pursuant to advertisement, dated 15.12.2017, be used. Later on, the 
Selection Board in its 57th meeting, conducted on 28.05.2019, 
interviewed the applicants and recommended the petitioner for 
appointment against the post of Professor of Urdu (BS-21). The 
recommendations of the Selection Board finalized in its 57th meeting, 
were placed before the Syndicate in its 71st meeting held on 
06.08.2019. Before any decision in the matter by the Syndicate, the 
Higher Education Department imposed ban against appointments in 
the Universities where either the remaining tenure of the Vice 
Chancellor was less than six months or the Vice Chancellor was 
assigned look after charge. In the wake of the ban imposed by the 
Higher Education Department, the Syndicate decided to refer back the 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--3-- 
 
 
 
matter to the Selection Board for review of its recommendations. 
Being aggrieved of the decision of the Selection Board, 
recommending the name of the petitioner against the post of Professor 
of Urdu and promotion of the petitioner as Associate Professor from a 
retrospective date and letter issued by the Higher Education 
Department asking the Vice Chancellor to rectify the draft minutes of 
the 75th meeting of the Syndicate, Dr. Azmat Rubab (co-applicant) 
filed three Writ Petitions (bearing Nos.39468/2019, 22916/2020 and 
22947/2020) before this Court.  The Selection Board in its 58th 
meeting held on 05.011.2019 reviewed the case for appointment 
against the post of Professor of Urdu and recommended re-
advertisement of the posts. The recommendations of the Selection 
Board, finalized in its 58th meeting, were placed before the Syndicate 
in its 75th meeting held on 29.01.2020. Since consensus could not be 
arrived at between the members of the Syndicate on 29.01.2020, the 
matter regarding appointment of Professor of Urdu in the University 
was again taken up in 76th meeting of the Syndicate but no decision 
could be taken due to pendency of writ petitions filed by and Dr. 
Azmat Rubab. After decision of the aforesaid writ petitions filed by 
Dr. Azmat Rubab, the issue relating to appointment of Professor of 
Urdu was taken up by the Syndicate in its 81st meeting held on 
30.06.2021 and, while approving the name of the petitioner, referred 
the matter to the Chancellor for ultimate decision on the ground that 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--4-- 
 
 
 
the recommendations of the Selection Board and those of Syndicate 
were at variance. The Chancellor, through order, dated 17.01.2023, 
while concurring with the recommendations of the Selection Board, 
finalized in its 58th meeting, ordered for re-advertisement of the post 
of Professor of Urdu (BS-21). Pursuant to order passed by the 
Chancellor, the Syndicate in its 88th meeting held on 16.06.2023 
referred the case to the Selection Board for recommendations against 
the post of Professor of Urdu. The said decision of the Syndicate was 
circulated through Notification, dated 04.07.2023, however, the 
Syndicate in its 90th meeting held on 15.08.2023 decided to get re-
evaluation of the cases of the petitioner and Dr. Azmat Rubab (co-
applicant) to adjudge their suitability for appointment as Professor of 
Urdu (BS-21), which decision was circulated through Notification, 
dated 04.09.2023. The petitioner being aggrieved of the decision of 
the Chancellor as well as Notifications, dated 04.07.2023 and 
04.09.2023, has filed this petition. 
3. 
Insofar as factual background of the contempt petition is 
concerned, suffice it to note that in the said petition the petitioner has 
agitated non-compliance of order, dated 25.04.2024, passed by this 
court in miscellaneous application (C.M.No.1/2024) filed in the main 
writ petition.  

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--5-- 
 
 
 
4. 
The submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner 
at bar and those presented in written form can be summed up in the 
words that once the name of the petitioner was recommended by the 
Selection Board for appointment against the post of Professor of 
Urdu, her case could not be sent back by the Syndicate to the 
Selection Board for review as the said exercise is alien to the 
provisions of Lahore College for Women University, Lahore 
Ordinance, 2002 (“the Ordinance 2002”) and the service Statutes 
made thereunder; that it is a case of clear cut discrimination inasmuch 
out of 111 persons, recommended by the Selection Board, 110 persons 
have already been appointed whereas the petitioner’s name was left 
out for the reasons best known to the University Authorities; that mala 
fide conduct of the University authorities is evinced from the fact that 
they tried to deprive the petitioner of appointment against the subject 
post on the basis of a letter issued by the Higher Education 
Department on 28.06.2019 conveying ban on recruitment in the 
Universities where either remaining tenure of Vice Chancellor was 
less than six months or Acting Vice Chancellor was assigned role to 
look after the charge despite the fact that name of the petitioner was 
recommended by the Selection Board for appointment against the post 
in question much prior to the issuance of the said letter by the Higher 
Education Department; that though letter, dated 28.06.2019, was 
withdrawn by the Higher Education Department through its 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--6-- 
 
 
 
subsequent letter, dated 06.09.2019, but University Authorities did not 
bother to issue formal appointment letter in favour of the petitioner 
just out of mala fide and callousness; that recommendations of the 
Selection Board apart, since the petitioner has been working as Head 
of the Department of Urdu, her suitability for appointment against the 
post of Professor of Urdu could not be doubted and that the Selection 
Board considered the earlier evaluation of the petitioner in the light of 
the fact that the subsequent advertisement was issued within one year 
from the first advertisement thus the same was as good as fresh 
evaluation, hence adverse opinion cannot be formed against the 
petitioner on the said ground. To fortify his contentions, learned 
counsel has relied upon the cases of Government of Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa through Chief Secretary and others v. Syed Sadiq Shah 
and others (2021 SCMR 747), Muhammad Tariq Javed v. The 
Agricultural and Research Department through Secretary and 2 
others (2018 PLC (CS) 1052), Ghulam Rasool v. Government of 
Pakistan through Secretary, Establishment Division Islamabad and 
others (PLD 2015 SC 6), Muhammad Ashraf Tiwana and others v. 
Pakistan and others (2013 SCMR 836), Muhammad Rasheed v. 
Government of Punjab and others (2006 SCMR 1082) and Mst. 
Sumaira Akram v. Secretary Education, Gilgit Baltistan and 6 others 
(2017 PLC (CS) 1321). 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--7-- 
 
 
 
5. 
While opposing the submissions made by the learned counsel 
for the petitioner, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent-University contends that since certain facts have not been 
clarified by the petitioner, he has put the record straight while filing 
reply to the contempt petition; that since pursuant to the 
advertisement, dated 15.12.2017,  no candidate was found suitable for 
appointment against the post of Professor of Urdu, fresh 
advertisement was got issued by the University, on 23.09.2018, thus, 
evaluation of the applicants pursuant to advertisement, dated 
15.12.2017, became redundant, hence no recommendations could be 
based thereon, thus, the petitioner could not claim herself fit for 
appointment against the subject post on the basis of recommendations 
of the Selection Board,  dated 28.05.2019, which were based on 
external evaluation undertaken pursuant to advertisement, dated 
15.12.2017; that bona fide of the University Authorities is established 
from the fact that though the Selection Board ordered for re-
advertisement of the post but the Syndicate only recommended for re-
evaluation of the applicants, including the petitioner, to adjudge their 
suitability for appointment against the subject post; that though there 
are certain procedural lapses on the part of the University Authorities 
while dealing with the case relating to appointment against the post of 
Professor of Urdu but the same cannot be used to nullify the bona fide 
act of the Syndicate for re-evaluation of the petitioner along with 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--8-- 
 
 
 
other applicant; that bona fide conduct of the University Authorities is 
discernable from the fact that though Chancellor has also ordered for 
re-advertisement of the post of Professor of Urdu but they are all out 
to accommodate the petitioner and other applicant on account of their 
experience gained during their lengthy careers; that the minutes of 
meeting of the Syndicate, referred by the learned counsel for the 
petitioner, do not come to her rescue as her name was recommended 
by the Syndicate for the reasons enshrined therein and that since the 
petitioner did not challenge the recommendations of the Syndicate 
taken in its 76th meeting, no interference is called for by this Court. 
Relies on Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Establishment 
Division, Islamabad and another v. Misri Ladhani and others (2023 
SCMR 915), Secretary Establishment Division, Government of 
Pakistan, Islamabad v. Aftab Ahmed Manika and others (2015 SCMR 
1006), Syed Muhammad Arif and others v. University of Balochistan 
and others (PLD 2006 S.C. 564) and Dr. Habibur Rehman v. The 
West Pakistan Public Service Commis Sion, Lahore and 4 others 
(PLD 1975 SC 144).   
6. 
Learned Law Officer, while supporting the learned counsel for 
the respondent-University, states that since valid reasons have been 
given in the order passed by the Chancellor, the same are immune 
from interference by this Court rather it is to be complied with in its 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--9-- 
 
 
 
letter and spirit; that this petition is not maintainable for the reason 
that earlier Dr. Azmat Rubab filed Writ Petition No.22619/2020 
which was dismissed by this Court on the ground that the same was 
not maintainable on account of non-statutory nature of service rules 
governing the terms and conditions of employees of the University. 
7. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner, while exercising his right of 
rebuttal, submits that since name of the petitioner was recommended 
by the Syndicate in its 81st meeting, held on 30.06.2021, she was not 
supposed to challenge the recommendations of the Syndicate taken in 
its 76th meeting.  Adds that this Court can look into any malfeasance 
on the part of the executive in relation to appointment against any 
post. 
8. 
I have given anxious consideration to the arguments advanced 
by the learned counsel for the parties and have also gone through the 
documents appended with these petitions in addition to the case-law 
cited at the bar. 
9. 
Firstly, taking up the objection raised by the learned Law 
Officer that since the rules/statutes governing the terms and conditions 
of the petitioner are non-statutory in nature this petition is not 
maintainable, I am of the view that if any issue relating to terms and 
conditions of her service has been challenged by the petitioner, the bar 
referred by the learned Law Officer, is very much attracted but when 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--10-- 
 
 
 
she has agitated her grievance relating to her appointment as Professor 
of Urdu as a result of fresh recruitment, the objection raised by the 
learned Law Officer holds little water. Reliance, in this regard can be 
placed on the case reported as Jawad Khan and others v. National 
Database and Registration Authority (NADRA) through Chairman at 
Islamabad and others (2022 PLC (C.S.) 94) wherein a learned 
Division Bench of Peshawar High Court, while responding to an 
objection relating to non-maintainability of constitutional petition in 
terms of Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 on account of non-statutory nature of the applicable 
service rules, has inter alia concluded as under:- 
“9. 
 The other objection of respondents regarding 
the fact that the instant constitutional petitions have 
not been maintainable due to the reason that service 
rules of the petitioners have not yet been clothed with 
the attire of statutory rules. It is sufficient to say that 
grievances of the petitioners have been arising from 
unfair treatment meted to them at the time of their 
appointments. Their grievance has not arisen when the 
rules of NADRA authorities had become applicable to 
them. In other words, they have not been agitating any 
of the grievance of violation of un-statutory rules of 
NADRA………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………  
The above reproduced section clearly shows that 
NADRA has been performing governmental functions, 
directly under the authority of the Federal Government 
which is also evident from section 3 of the Ordinance 
and thus there has been no doubt that NADRA has been 
amenable to the constitutional jurisdiction of this 
Court. The question that writ petition of an employee in 
respect of violation of non-statutory rules of NADRA, is 
not maintainable is a different question altogether. If 
grievance of an employee arose out of any adverse 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--11-- 
 
 
 
order passed against him during his service, under the 
un-statutory rules, a writ petition before a High Court 
would no doubt be non-maintainable according to 
ratios of judgments in the case of "Chairman NADRA 
Islamabad 
through 
Chairman 
and 
another 
v. 
Muhammad Ali Shah and others" reported as 2017 
SCMR 1979 as well as in the case of "Maj. (Retd.) Syed 
Muhammad Tanveer Abbas and another v. Federation 
of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Interior and 
another" reported as 2019 SCMR 984, but as stated 
earlier grievances of the petitioners have not been 
arising out of violation of the un-statutory rules but 
their 
very 
appointments 
in 
NADRA.………… 
…………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………….. 
Since grievances of the petitioners in the instant 
constitutional petitions have not been arising out of 
violation of any service rules of NADRA, but has been 
arising out of their first appointment in NADRA, facts 
of these cases would therefore be distinguishable from 
facts of cases of the private parties in the judgments 
reported as 2017 SCMR 1979 and 2019 SCMR 984.” 
If the objection, under discussion, is considered in the light of afore-
quoted judgment the same is not worth consideration and is thus 
spurned. 
10. 
While pressing the objection against maintainability of this 
petition, learned Law Officer placed reliance on the order of this court 
whereby writ petition, filed by Dr. Azmat Rubab against the 
recommendations of the Selection Board in favour of the petitioner, 
was dismissed. Perhaps, the learned Law Officer has referred to said 
decision in oblivion of the fact that this Court can take care of any act 
of the executive in relation to recruitment against a particular post 
when the same is not covered under the relevant law or rules. If any 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--12-- 
 
 
 
case-law is required, reference is made to the decision of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court reported as Rashid Ali Channa and others v. 
Muhammad Junaid Farooqui and others (2017 PLC (C.S) 1187).  
11. 
Now taking up the plea raised by the learned counsel for the 
respondent-University that since nobody was recommended by the 
Selection Board pursuant to advertisement, dated 15.12.2017, the 
evaluation made by the external evaluators under the said 
advertisement became redundant, I am of the view that perhaps 
learned counsel for the respondent-University has raised said plea in 
oblivion of the Office Note (Annexure-E) which for convenience is 
imaged below:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--13-- 
 
 
 
From above, it is crystal clear that Vice Chancellor himself decided 
that previous evaluation of the candidates was sufficient for 
determination of their suitability against the post under fresh 
advertisement then as to how University Authorities can raise any 
objection against the reliance of the Selection Board on the previous 
evaluation of the petitioner and co-applicant which was conducted 
pursuant to advertisement, dated 15.12.2017. 
12. 
It is important to mention over here that order of the Vice 
Chancellor that previous evaluation of the petitioner and other 
applicant was sufficient to determine their suitability for appointment 
against the said post, was endorsed by the Sub-Committee of 
Selection Board in its meeting held on 09.05.2019 by inter-alia 
recommending as under:- 
“The members of the Committee discussed the agenda 
regarding external evaluation for the post of Professor 
Urdu (BPS-21) advertised on 23 Sep, 2018. The Member 
of the committee unanimously agreed to use the previous 
evaluation for the post of Professor Urdu (BPS-21) 
advertised on 7th Dec, 2017 as there is less than 1 year 
time difference between both advertisements.” 
 
From above quoted portion from the minutes of meeting of the Sub-
Committee of the Selection Board, it is more than clear that Sub-
Committee proceeded to rely upon the previous evaluation of the 
applicants on the ground that difference between two advertisements 
was less than a year.  In this scenario, it does not lie in the mouth of 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--14-- 
 
 
 
the University Authorities to raise objection against the eligibility of 
the petitioner for appointment against the post of Professor of Urdu on 
the ground that her fresh evaluation was not got conducted pursuant to 
second advertisement.   
13. 
Learned counsel for the respondent-University put much 
emphasis on the fact that since the recommendations of the Selection 
Board in favour of the petitioner suffered from serious procedural 
flaws, the same could not be used to appoint the petitioner against the 
subject post but has not been able to convince this Court that under 
which provision of the Ordinance, 2002 or the service Statutes of the 
University, the Syndicate was empowered to refer the matter back to 
the Selection Board for review of its earlier recommendations. Section 
21 of the Ordinance, 2002 deals with the powers and duties of the 
Syndicate. According to clause (xvii) of sub-section 2 of Section 21 of 
the Ordinance, the Syndicate has to appoint University teachers and 
other officers on the recommendations of the Selection Board.  
Further according to Statute 7 of the Schedule relating to the First 
Statute, the Selection Board has to recommend the names of the 
persons against various posts.  Moreover, as per service Statute 7(2), 
in the event of unresolved difference of opinion between the Selection 
Board and the Syndicate, the matter is to be referred to the Chancellor 
for final decision. In this backdrop, if the Syndicate was not in 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--15-- 
 
 
 
agreement with the recommendation of the Selection Board finalized 
in its 57th meeting, the proper course was to send the matter to the 
Chancellor for final decision but under no provision of the Ordinance 
2002 or any service Statute the Syndicate could refer the matter to the 
Selection Board for review of its earlier recommendations. 
14. 
It is well established by now that power of review can only be 
exercised by a forum or authority under relevant law or rules and 
when the applicable law/rules do not provide for remedy of review 
against any order, the same cannot be assumed by an authority or a 
forum suo-moto. Reliance in this regard is placed on the cases 
reported as Mian Ghulam Mustafa and another v. Chief Conservator 
of Forest Punjab and others (2004 PLC CS 1527) and Khalid Rashid 
Sheikh and others v. Judicial Officer, Punjab Cooperative Board for 
Liquidation and others (2018 CLC 1955). In the former judgment, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, while taking note of the exercise 
power of review by the Punjab Service Tribunal, in absence of any 
explicit provision in the relevant law, has inter-alia concluded as 
under:- 
“5.***** it is to be noted that power of review cannot be 
exercised by way of discretion unless conferred upon a 
forum by some law or statute.  No such power is 
conferred upon the Service Tribunal.  It was not the 
question of rectification simplicitor because order dated 
14.11.2000 could not be rectified without reviewing the 
same and no such review could have been made by the 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--16-- 
 
 
 
Service Tribunal as no such provision is available in the 
relevant law…..” 
 
If the fate of the order passed by the Syndicate referring the matter 
back to the Selection Board for review of its recommendations, 
without backing of the relevant law and subsequent recommendations 
of Selection Board in its 58th meeting, are seen in the light of the 
afore-referred judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, there leaves 
no ambiguity that when the Selection Board was not clothed with the 
power of review, the Syndicate could not send the matter to it for 
review of its earlier recommendations rather if the Syndicate did not 
endorse the recommendations of the Selection Board, the proper 
course was to refer the matter to the Chancellor for final decision but 
having not done so the University authorities violated the provisions 
of the Ordinance 2002 as well as service Statutes. 
15. 
 There is no cavil with the fact that the Syndicate of the 
University is at higher pedestal as compared to the Selection Board 
but it does not mean that the Selection Board is bound to act upon the 
orders of the Syndicate which are not supported by the relevant law. 
Insofar as the case in hand is concerned, it is admitted position that the 
Selection Board does not enjoy the power to review its own 
recommendations but the Selection Board instead of desisting against 
the order of the Syndicate asking for review of its recommendations, 
proceeded to recommend re-advertisement of the posts in its 58th 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--17-- 
 
 
 
meeting. It is classical example of misuse of authority by a body 
which did not enjoy the power to do an act. It is well settled by now 
that what cannot be achieved directly cannot be allowed to be attained 
indirectly. Reference in this regard can be made to the cases reported 
as Haji Muhammad Boota and others v. Member (Revenue), Board of 
Revenue, Punjab and others (PLD 2003 SC 979) wherein the 
proposition, under discussion, has been responded in the following 
manner:- 
“Apart from the above if the plea of the petitioners is 
accepted, it would amount to frustrating the age-old 
established principle that a person cannot get indirectly 
what he has failed to get directly. The petitioners started 
litigation in the year 1952 claiming title to the disputed 
property, The trial Court after scanning the entire 
evidence rejected their claim. Said determinations were 
maintained by the learned First Appellate Court the 
learned Single Judge of the Lahore High Court. The 
petitioners 
have 
failed 
in 
getting 
the 
above 
determinations set aside by all the Courts below and now 
simply by withdrawing their appeal before this Court or 
for that matter withdrawing the suit would not 
frustrate/wash away the well-reasoned determinations of 
all the Courts. The decree passed in this case by the 
Court below is binding on all the parties. The aggrieved 
party can only seek remedy against it by having a decree 
set aside on merits. A five lines order allowing 
withdrawal of the suit cannot be termed as a decision on 
merits or a judgment so as of nullify the judicial 
pronouncements of competent Courts. This Court while 
allowing withdrawal of suit had not at all dilated upon 
the determinations of the Courts below on merits. At the 
cost of repetition, it may be stated that the age-old 
principle is that what is not permitted to be done directly 
cannot be achieved through circumvention of law by 
indirect means. After losing the case right up to the level 
of the High Court the petitioners cannot be allowed to 
say that the effect of decided cases against them has been 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--18-- 
 
 
 
washed away simply by securing an order from this 
Court allowing them to withdraw the suit.”  
16. 
It is ironical that Selection Board recommended the name of the 
petitioner for appointment against the post of Professor of Urdu, in its 
57th 
meeting, 
held 
on 
28.05.2019 
and 
after 
placing 
its 
recommendation before the Syndicate, it became functus-officio, thus 
its subsequent recommendations did not carry any sanctity, hence, the 
recommendations of the Selection Board, in its 58th meeting, were 
inconsequential especially when the Syndicate never approved them. 
Even today, learned counsel for the respondent-University has taken 
specific plea that the University authorities did not agree with the 
recommendations of the Selection Board or the findings of the 
Chancellor regarding re-advertisement of the post of Professor of 
Urdu rather they decided to get re-evaluation of the applicants. 
17. 
It is very relevant to note that the University Authorities have 
treated it a case of difference between the recommendations of the 
Selection Board and findings of the Syndicate but the record speaks 
otherwise inasmuch as not only the Selection Board in its 57th meeting 
recommended the name of the petitioner for appointment against the 
post of Professor of Urdu but also the Syndicate in its 81st meeting, 
approved the appointment of the petitioner against the said post. In 
such eventuality, the only option with the University Authorities was 
to issue formal appointment letter in favour of the petitioner 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--19-- 
 
 
 
irrespective of what happened after 57th meeting of the Selection 
Board till 81st meeting of the Syndicate but instead of discharging 
their duties, they made the petitioner a rolling stone on one pretext or 
the other. This fact alone is sufficient to believe that the University 
Authorities were/are all out to keep the petitioner aloof from the 
appointment against the post of Professor of Urdu. 
18. 
In my humble opinion, the University Authorities took 
recommendations of Selection Board finalized in its 58th meeting but 
did not bother to consider that when said recommendations were not 
backed by relevant law or service Statutes, the same were 
inconsequential upon the rights of the petitioner and the same being 
inexecutable could not be used for any future reference. 
19. 
While addressing the Court, learned counsel representing the 
University has repeatedly argued that bona fide of the University 
Authorities is evinced from the fact that though not only the Selection 
Board recommended for re-advertisement of the post but also the 
Chancellor ordered for re-advertisement but the University 
Authorities, in view of the lengthy career of the petitioner and her 
experience, ordered for her re-evaluation only against which she 
should have no qualm. In this regard, I do not agree with the learned 
counsel for the respondent-University for the reason that neither the 
Selection Board nor the Syndicate of the University or the Chancellor 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--20-- 
 
 
 
has the powers to violate any provision of Ordinance, 2002 or service 
Statutes made thereunder rather they are supposed to comply them in 
letter and spirit, hence, magnanimity of the University Authorities, 
being portrayed by the learned counsel for the respondent-University, 
cannot be lauded as adherence to the relevant law, rules/statute is 
hallmark for good administration whereas the acts of the University 
Authorities speak otherwise. Moreover, the actions/inactions on the 
part of the University Authorities are suggestive of the fact that the 
affairs of the University, in particular in relation to appointment 
against the post of teaching faculty, are not being run fairly.  
20. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner categorically stated that four 
members of the Syndicate, raised objections against the minutes of 
75th meeting of Syndicate, therefore, the same could not be used to the 
disinterest of the petitioner. While scanning the file, I have come 
across communication bearing No.SO(Univ.)13-3/2018-P, dated 
10.02.2020, addressed by the Deputy Secretary (UNIV), Higher 
Education Department (one of the members of the Syndicate) to the 
Vice Chancellor of the University wherein he raised certain objections 
against the minutes of 75th meeting of Syndicate with the suggestion 
that the same be rectified according to the relevant law/rules/Statutes. 
The said communication, for convenience of reference, is imaged 
below:- 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--21-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--22-- 
 
 
 
From above imaged letter, it is manifestly clear that Syndicate in its 
75th meeting did not consider the case of the petitioner in line with the 
prescribed criteria. In the presence of such material objections, it 
cannot be believed that the University Authorities dealt with the case 
of the petitioner fairly and justly rather biasedness on their part 
against the petitioner is floating on the surface which cannot be let 
unnoticed rather deserves to be deprecated with full vigour. 
21. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner, while addressing the Court, 
took specific plea that since the petitioner has been performing duties 
as Head of the Department of Urdu, since 30.06.2021, her suitability 
for appointment against the post of Professor of Urdu at this stage 
cannot be doubted. The said stance of the learned counsel for the 
petitioner remained un-rebutted as learned counsel for the respondent-
University has not been able to refer to any document to counter said 
plea. In these circumstances, the decision of the University 
Authorities for re-evaluation of the petitioner through the Selection 
Board, without any support from the relevant law, seems to be an 
exercise in futility when especially visualized in the light of the fact 
that the Selection Board in its 57th meeting recommended the name of 
the petitioner, coupled with the approval of the name of the petitioner 
by the Syndicate in its 81st meeting.  

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--23-- 
 
 
 
22. 
The dubious conduct of the University Authorities is also 
established from the fact that they halted the recruitment against the 
post of Professor of Urdu in the light of letter, dated 28.06.2019, 
issued by the Higher Education Department despite the fact that name 
of the petitioner was recommended by the Selection Board on 
28.05.2019, a month prior to the issuance of the said letter.  Further, 
letter, dated 28.06.2019, relating to ban upon recruitment in the public 
sector universities was withdrawn by the Higher Education 
Department through letter, dated 06.09.2019, but the University 
Authorities did not issue formal appointment letter in favour of the 
petitioner rather delayed the matter on flimsy grounds. The narration 
of facts, given hereinabove, suggests that perhaps the University 
Authorities and the Selection Board were playing hide and seek with 
the petitioner inasmuch both the said bodies had been referring her 
matter to each other without the backing of relevant law and 
justification. In the presence of such undisputed facts, the conduct of 
the University Authorities, towards appointment of the petitioner 
against the subject post, cannot be considered above board. 
23. 
It has not been denied by the learned counsel appearing on 
behalf of the respondent-University that the name of the petitioner 
was recommended by the Selection Board, in its 57th meeting. He has 
further admitted that the Selection Board did not enjoy the power to 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--24-- 
 
 
 
review its own recommendations, meaning thereby that the Syndicate 
could either endorse the recommendation of the Selection Board or 
could refer the matter to the Chancellor with the reasons to differ with 
the recommendations of the Selection Board but when the 
recommendations of the Selection Board, contained in the minutes of 
its 57th  meeting, coupled with the approval of the case of the 
petitioner by the Syndicate in its 81st meeting, the University 
Authorities were bound to issue appointment letter in favour of the 
petitioner. A learned Division Bench of the Peshawar High Court in 
the matter of Engineer Siddiq Ullah v. Government of Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa through Chief Secretary, Peshawar and 2 others (2013 
PLC (C.S.) 1405), while taking serious note of non-issuance of 
appointment letter in favour of the applicant, who was on top of the 
merit, has inter-alia concluded as under:- 
“6. Thus, keeping in consideration the above stated 
position, the plea raised by the petitioner that he has 
topped the merit list is substantiated by the minutes of the 
meeting of Selection Committee produced by the 
respondents and when the entire process has been 
carried out as per terms and conditions prescribed for 
the post in question and when there is no allegation 
against the petitioner that his selection was not on merits 
or it was made in violation of any rules/regulations. 
Further, no reason much less plausible has been 
rendered by the respondents regarding the non-
appointment of the petitioner as well as re-advertisement 
of the said post with certain attractive package, then we 
are of the view that after having been duly selected, a 
right had accrued to him for the job against the vacancy 
for which he was selected, which will not go un-noticed, 
moreso, when the petitioner including two others have 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--25-- 
 
 
 
participated in the test/interview/ presentation on the 
package announced in the initial advertisement, then 
depriving the petitioner of his vested right as well as re-
advertisement of the post he applied for with attractive 
package is an act on the part of respondents, which is not 
sustainable in law, hence case for issuance a writ is 
made out.” 
 
Further, the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of 
Secretary, Revenue Division and others v. Muhammad Saleem (2008 
SCMR 948), in the similar set of circumstances, while deprecating 
inaction on the part of the departmental authorities to deal with future 
service prospect of a government servant, has inter-alia held as 
under:- 
“5. We have also not found that the case in hand involves 
any substantial question of law of public importance as 
according to the facts of the present case, only a 
direction has been issued to get PERs of the respondent's 
case completed from another officer, with whom 
respondent had been working as subordinate, because 
the case of the respondent was of a special and an 
exceptional nature. As the Senior of the respondents were 
admittedly biased and not independent to evaluate his 
performance 
due 
to 
commencement 
of 
criminal 
proceedings amongst them, therefore, this direction was 
apt in the circumstances of the case. The law has 
provided it the duty of the department to get prepared the 
PERs of an officer, to keep it and to maintain it, so that 
the same could be used for the other prescribed purposes 
and at the time of promotion of an official. At the 
relevant juncture, as the department was neglectful of its 
duty to get fulfilled the PERs of respondent, therefore, 
respondent having no alternate and remedy was right to 
beseech the indulgence of the learned High Court 
through its writ jurisdiction as the department was bent 
upon to deprive the right of its own officer, due to its own 
inaction. Accordingly, the direction issued by the Lahore 
High Court cannot be considered to be in violation of the 
provisions of the above noted Article 212 of the 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--26-- 
 
 
 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan. Therefore, 
the appeal is dismissed with no order as to costs.” 
 
If the conduct of the University Authorities to linger on the matter of 
the petitioner, for appointment against the post of Professor of Urdu, 
for years and years is seen in view of the afore-referred judgments, the 
same do not sound reasonable rather speaks volumes about their 
lethargic conduct.  
24. 
It is not the case of the University Authorities that the petitioner 
managed recommendations in her favour from the Selection Board or 
got approved her name for appointment against the post of Professor 
of Urdu from the Syndicate in its 81st meeting. Further, the learned 
counsel representing the respondent-University, while showing total 
professional approach, admitted that there are certain loop holes on 
the part of the University Authorities while dealing with her case for 
appointment against the post of Professor of Urdu. If there was any 
considerable flaw or material irregularity going to the root of the case 
of the petitioner, instead of making her a rolling stone, the persons/ 
authorities responsible for such deficiencies were to be taken to task. 
The High Court of Azad Jammu & Kashmir, in the case of Shabraz 
Shabir v. District Education Officer (Male) Elementary and 
Secondary Education Muzaffarabad and 5 others (2023 PLC (CS) 
718), while  dealing with the consequences of withdrawal of 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--27-- 
 
 
 
appointment letter which otherwise were result of some loop holes of 
departmental authorities, has inter-alia concluded as under:-  
“VII ***** Beneficiaries of the orders passed by the 
departmental authorities could not be penalized for 
loopholes, inaction or procedural irregularity of the 
authorities.” 
 
Further, this Court in its recent judgment reported as Dr. Ghulam 
Sarwar v. Province of Punjab through Vice Chancellor and 5 others 
(2024 PLC (CS) 402), while dilating upon the subsequent declaration 
of appointment as void ab-initio, which otherwise was based upon the 
recommendations of the Section Board and approved by the 
Syndicate, has laid law to the following effect:- 
“9.  It is evidently clear that respondent-Chancellor 
has passed a speaking order as per law, however, there 
is only one aspect of the matter which needs 
reconsideration on part of the respondent-authorities i.e. 
whether petitioners procured their appointments through 
ill-will mala fide, fraud or illegal means and if the 
appointees are not at fault, the appointing authority 
ought to have been proceeded against as it is settled law 
that party should not be made to suffer for action or 
inaction of the authority, who was obliged to follow the 
law. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, vide 
judgment dated 11.06.2014, passed in C.P. No.51-L of 
2014 titled Ahsan Jabbar v. Government of the Punjab 
and others has held that if some fault was committed by 
the departmental authorities while assessing eligibility 
for appointment, the employee could not be deprived 
from his job due to faults of the department. 
10.  
I am constrained to note with concern that it was 
the respondents i.e. Selection Board and Syndicate, who 
appointed petitioners to the posts in question, therefore, 
presumably, the applicable law / rules and regulations 
should have been on their sleeves at the time of 
appointment of petitioners. If respondents are of the 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--28-- 
 
 
 
opinion that appointment of petitioners was made without 
approval of the competent authority, then instead of de-
notifying petitioners' appointment, respondents should 
have blamed themselves rather than claiming premium of 
their own wrongs. Reference can be made to Province of 
Punjab through Secretary, Agriculture, Government of 
Punjab and others v. Zulfiqar Ali (2006 SCMR 678). 
When confronted with the above, learned Legal Advisor 
for respondent-University, after taking instructions from 
the respondents, submits that respondent-University is 
ready to reconsider the matter on case to case basis and 
explore the possibility of creating new seats in favour of 
respondents, if such observation is made by this Court.” 
 
If the case of the petitioner is considered in the light of the afore-
quoted judgment of this Court, no other conclusion can be drawn 
except that when the Selection Board in its 57th meeting recommended 
the name of the petitioner and the Syndicate in its 81st meeting also 
approved her name, the presumption is that both the bodies supported 
the appointment of the petitioner against the post of Professor of Urdu 
in the light of the provisions of the Ordinance, 2002 and the service 
Statutes made thereunder. Thus, at this stage, the petitioner cannot be 
deprived of the appointment against the post of Professor of Urdu 
merely on the ground that the recommendations of the Selection 
Board suffered from any procedural flaw.   
25. 
A cursory glance over the factual canvass of the matter in hand 
shows that the issue relating to appointment against the post of 
Professor of Urdu is lingering on for more than six years despite the 
fact that due to sluggish attitude of the University Authorities, on the 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--29-- 
 
 
 
one hand, the University is deficient in respect of appointment of one 
Professor of Urdu and on the other, it is cause of a recurring heart 
burning and sense of deprivation for the petitioner which ultimately 
hampers her output.  A learned Division Bench of the Sindh High 
Court in the case of Muhammad Raheel Sarwar v. University of Sindh 
Jamshoro through Registrar and 3 others (PLD 2006 Karachi 82), 
while expressing concerns about inaction on the part of the executive 
with specific reference to the educational institutions, has inter-alia 
concluded as under:- 
“Recurrence and relapse of similar episode, in different 
parts of country is in bitter tasting both for the 
Government as well as those affected. Slackness and 
indifferent attitude of the State functionaries to attend 
and remedy the malady promptly reflects adversely on 
the working of the executive and legislative machinery of 
the State. It is sad to record that; the State functionaries 
do not learn lesson from past. They wake up either, when 
much water is flown or situation slips out of their control. 
Neither, any executive decision has been taken nor, 
appropriate and remedial legislative measures were 
adopted at appropriate time. Large number of undesired 
litigation could be avoided, if fair executive decisions are 
taken promptly and law is amended at the right time 
when the flaw is encountered.” 
 
If the conduct of the University Authorities is adjudged in the light of 
afore-referred judgment, it becomes inevitable to take stern action 
against them but with a view to maintain the goodwill of the 
educational institution, I am showing maximum restraint to refer the 
matter to any watchdog for thorough probe and action against the 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--30-- 
 
 
 
delinquents which deprived the students of the services of a highly 
qualified person against the post of a Professor. 
26. 
Learned Law Officer put much emphasis on the fact that since 
order of the Chancellor is well reasoned, it is not open for interference 
by this Court. In this regard, I am of the view that though the 
Chancellor has passed lengthy order but has not given even half a 
reason to the effect that as to how the Syndicate could refer the matter 
back to Selection Board for review and as to how the 
recommendations of the Selection Board, taken in its 57th meeting 
held on 28.05.2019 and those of the Syndicate finalized in its 81st 
meeting held on 30.06.2021 could be treated at variance. Thus, the 
order passed by the Chancellor cannot be considered as un-
exceptionable. 
27. 
While addressing the Court, learned counsel appearing on 
behalf of the respondent-University ferociously argued that since the 
petitioner did not challenge the decisions of the Syndicate, taken in its 
76th meeting, she was debarred to challenge the decision of the 
Chancellor. It is matter of record that Syndicate in its 71st meeting, 
referred the matter of the petitioner back to the Selection Board. The 
said decision of the Syndicate being not covered under any provision 
of the Ordinance, 2002 or the Service Statutes was inconsequential 
upon the rights of the petitioner. Further, when the Syndicate, in its 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--31-- 
 
 
 
81st meeting, approved the name of the petitioner for appointment 
against the post of Professor of Urdu, the earlier decision of the 
Syndicate became non-existent, hence, the petitioner was not 
supposed to challenge the same. Moreover, when recommendations of 
Selection Board, in its 58th meeting, which otherwise were 
inexecutable, were approved by the Syndicate in any subsequent 
meeting after 71st meeting, the same could not be used to the 
disinterest of the petitioner. 
28. 
It is of paramount consideration that Article 4 of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 mandates that 
every citizen should be dealt with in accordance with law. The 
relevant law in relation to the case of the petitioner is the Ordinance, 
2002 and the Service Statutes made thereunder. Since the actions/ 
inactions of the Universities authorities run contrary to the relevant 
law, their conduct invites strict action against them so that they do not 
think about such unconstitutional acts in future. The Apex Court of 
the country in the matter of Junaid Wazir v. Superintendent of Police, 
PRU/Dolphin Police, Lahore (2024 SCMR 181), while highlighting 
the importance of the fundamental rights of the citizens, in particular 
that everyone should be dealt with in accordance with law, has inter 
alia held as under:- 
“9. To enjoy the protection of law and to be treated in 
accordance with the law is the inalienable right of every 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--32-- 
 
 
 
citizen. The purposefulness of Article 4 of the 
Constitution is to ascribe and integrate the doctrine of 
equality before law or equal protection of law, and no 
action detrimental to the life and liberty of any person 
can be taken without due process of law. Public 
functionaries are supposed to execute and perform their 
duty in good faith, honestly and within the precincts of 
their legally recognized powers so that the person 
concerned may be treated in accordance with law. The 
principles of natural justice require that the delinquent 
should be afforded a fair opportunity to converge, 
explain and contest the claims against him before he is 
found guilty and condemned. The principles of natural 
justice and fair-mindedness are grounded in the 
philosophy of affording a right of audience before any 
detrimental action is taken, in tandem with its ensuing 
constituent that the foundation of any adjudication or 
order of a quasi-judicial authority, statutory body or any 
departmental authority regulated under some law must 
be rational and impartial and the decision maker has an 
adequate amount of decision making independence and 
the reasons of the decision arrived at should be amply 
well-defined, just, right and understandable, therefore it 
is incumbent that all judicial, quasi- judicial and 
administrative authorities should carry out their powers 
with a judicious and evenhanded approach to ensure 
justice according to tenor of law and without any 
violation of the principles of natural justice. In the case 
of Tariq Aziz-ud-Din, Human Rights Cases Nos. 8340, 
9504-G, 13936-G, 13635-P and 14306-G to 14309-G of 
2009 (2011 PLC (C.S.) 1130), this Court held that all 
judicial, quasi-judicial and administrative authorities 
must exercise power in a reasonable manner and also 
must ensure justice as per spirit of law and instruments 
regarding exercise of discretion [Ref: Delhi Transport 
Corporation v. D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress AIR 1991 SC 
101 and Mansukhlal Vithaldas Chauhan v. State of 
Gujarat 1997(7) SCC 622].” 
If the acts of the University authorities are seen in the light of the 
afore-quoted observations of the august Supreme Court of Pakistan 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--33-- 
 
 
 
there leaves no doubt that they violated the constitutional mandate, 
hence, their actions cannot be validated. 
29. 
During arguments, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent-University opposed the request of the petitioner for 
appointment against the post of Professor of Urdu but conduct of his 
clients speak otherwise inasmuch as while filing report and parawise 
comment, in this petition, instead of submitting parawise reply to the 
contents of the petition, contented with the following reply:- 
 “Para-wise Reply 
All averments of facts contained in the petition, 
unless specifically admitted herein are denied. The 
correct factual and legal position has been stated in the 
Preliminary Objections, which may be read and treated 
as an integral part of the reply on merits. 
Reply to Facts & Grounds 
All the assertions and contentions made in the 
body of petition are vehemently denied being incorrect, 
false and for lack of record. The preliminary submissions 
and objections stated above may be read as an integral 
part to this reply. The answering respondent have only 
acted in compliance of the Order dated 12.04.2023 
issued by this Honourable Court and no violation in any 
manner whatsoever has been done. The matter of the 
petitioner was duly placed before the Syndicate in its next 
meeting and the Syndicate further referred it to the 
Selection Board for re- evaluation as per fresh external 
reports but before it could be done, the present petition 
was filed to halt the ongoing process. The alleged 
recommendation of the Selection Board in favour of the 
petitioner was declared null and void after the ban was 
imposed by the HED on 28.06.2019. Even otherwise, the 
Selection Board or the Syndicate are duly empowered to 
recall or rescind their decision/recommendations unless 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--34-- 
 
 
 
they have not been acted upon by the Competent 
Authority. 
The University has already initiated the process of re-
evaluation which may be followed by appointment, 
therefore halting the process at this stage would be 
detrimental not only for the other candidate but the 
University too.” 
A birds’ eye view of the afore-quoted portions from the report and 
parawise comments submitted on behalf of the University Authorities 
affirms that instead of replying the contents of this petition, they felt 
satisfied with evasive denial.  It is well settled by now that evasive 
denial amounts to admission to the claim of the other party.  Reliance 
in this regard is placed on the cases reported as Ghulam Rasool 
through L.Rs. and others v. Muhammad Hussain and others (PLD 
2011 SC 119), Qalandar and 4 others v. Muhammad Rafi-ud-Din 
(2007 SCMR 1079) and Muhammad Ashraf v. Abdul Ghafoor and 4 
others (1999 SCMR 2633). 
30. 
Though learned counsel representing respondent-University, 
while utilizing legal expertise, has tried to explain certain facts in the 
reply to the contempt petition but in my humble opinion the contents 
of the said reply cannot be read as response in this petition. The 
sketchy nature of the report and parawise comments submitted on 
behalf of the University Authorities stands proof of the fact that either 
they have no reply to the grounds urged by the petitioner or they with 
a view to save themselves from any future action, did not opt to deny 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--35-- 
 
 
 
the contents of this petition with reasoning. In this backdrop, the oral 
assertions made by learned counsel for respondent-University cannot 
be considered sufficient to deny the sought for relief to the petitioner.  
31. 
A cursory glance over the report and parawise comments filed 
on behalf of the University Authorities shows that they have inter-alia 
taken objection that since the petitioner earlier filed W.P. 
No.1282/2023 before this Court, this petition is not maintainable.  
Perhaps, the University Authorities have raised such objection in 
oblivion of the fact that in the said petition, the petitioner assailed 
order, dated 17.01.2023, passed by the Secretary, Higher Education 
Department whereas in this petition, the petitioner has assailed the 
vires of the order of the Chancellor and the subsequent Notifications 
issued by the University Authorities. Thus, the orders challenged in 
both these petitions being entirely different, this petition cannot be 
dismissed on the point of maintainability simple for the reason that 
petitioner also filed an earlier Writ Petition. 
32. 
It is matter of record that our educational institutions are 
lagging far behind as compared to the educational institutions in the 
region or at World level. Besides other factors, non-fulfillment of 
seats of the teaching faculty within time or from amongst the most 
suitable persons, is the major cause for decay of our educational 
system. It is very shameful for us as a nation that none of our national 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--36-- 
 
 
 
universities figure amongst the top level universities in the World.  
The prime consideration, while making appointments against the posts 
of Assistant Professor, Associate Professor or the Professor in a public 
sector university, should be merit and the deserving candidates should 
be allowed to impart knowledge to the students while promptly 
making appointments against the vacant posts in the educational 
institutions in particular the Universities.  The dismal picture of the 
affairs of the University, portrayed in this petition, speaks loud about 
the fact that instead of appointing the best of the best from amongst 
the available lot, the University Authorities are trying their level best 
to desist appointment of the petitioner against the post of Professor of 
Urdu which practice in my humble opinion would have negative 
impact upon the outcome of the public sector universities.   
33. 
It is of common knowledge that in every region of the world, 
talented and intelligent individuals are desired. They are drawn to 
wealthy nations because of the higher incomes, superior living 
standards, availability of cutting-edge technology and more stable 
political and social environments. The majority of migration is from 
underdeveloped countries to western industrialized and advanced 
countries. Our country is example of a developing country that has 
been a victim of the brain drain. People with skills and competence 
find Pakistan an inhospitable place for their services inter alia on 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--37-- 
 
 
 
account of step-motherly treatment by the persons at the helm of the 
affairs. While hearing the arguments advanced by the learned counsel 
for the parties as well as learned Law Officer, I have noted with heavy 
heart and anguish pain that the persons having exceptional educational 
background are being treated indifferently which in my humble 
opinion is one of the major causes of brain drain from the country. 
Brain drain being fleshing issue at national level, all the stakeholders 
are striving to know its causes and to eradicate them but none of them 
has so far felt the sensitivity of the repercussions of maltreatment 
towards the persons having brilliant academic record. It is natural that 
when a person is not given due respect for which he otherwise 
deserves he is justified to shift abroad where he not only receives due 
respect but also finds equal chances to flourish in respect of future 
career prospects. It is of common knowledge that overseas Pakistanis 
having professional/technical qualification are enjoying high positions 
in America, Europe and other parts of the World. The only reason 
behind it is the exceptional services being rendered by them to the 
citizens of the countries where they are settled. In case, they are given 
their due rights within the country, perhaps, they would not even think 
to shift abroad. 
34. 
According to Article 3 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan, 1973 the State has the responsibility to eliminate all forms 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--38-- 
 
 
 
of exploitations and fulfillment of fundamental rights of the citizens.   
If the conduct of the University Authorities is seen in the light of 
referred Article, it becomes manifest that instead of performing their 
obligations they were all out to exploit the petitioner by way of 
keeping her aloof from her appointment as Professor of Urdu despite 
the fact that her name was not only recommended by the Selection 
Board in its 57th meeting but also the Syndicate in its 81st meeting also 
approved her name. The Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the 
case of Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa through Chief Secretary, 
Peshawar and others v. Maqsad Hayat and others (2023 SCMR 8) 
while highlighting the importance of protection against any kind of 
exploitation by the departmental authorities in respect of the perks and 
privileges of the government servants, has inter-alia concluded as 
under:- 
“*****The objective of good governance cannot be 
achieved 
by 
exercising 
discretionary 
powers 
unreasonably or arbitrarily without rhyme or reason, 
and/or without compos mentis, but such objective can 
only be met by adhering to the rules of justness, fairness 
and openness as enshrined under Articles 4 and 25 of the 
Constitution. In the case in hand, the non-payment 
and/or deduction of conveyance allowance from monthly 
perks during summer and winter vacations would be 
tantamount to the violation of fundamental rights. Article 
3 of the Constitution casts an unavoidable and 
inescapable obligation upon the State to ensure the 
elimination of all forms of exploitation, and the gradual 
fulfillment 
of 
fundamental 
principles 
from 
each 
according to their ability, to each according to their 
work. Whereas under Article 38, it is provided that the 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--39-- 
 
 
 
State shall secure the wellbeing of the people, 
irrespective of sex, caste, creed, or race by raising their 
standard of living, by preventing concentration of wealth 
and the means of production and distribution in the 
hands of a few to the detriment of general interest and by 
ensuring equitable adjustment of rights between 
employers and employees, and landlords and tenants. In 
the case of Ikram Bari and 524 others v. National Bank 
of Pakistan through President and another (2005 SCMR 
100), this Court held that an Islamic Welfare State is 
under an obligation to establish a society which is free 
from exploitation and wherein social and economic 
'justice is guaranteed to its citizens……” 
If the conduct of the University Authorities since the year 2018 is seen 
in the light of Article 3 ibid, it seems that they have left no stone 
unturned to exploit the petitioner in respect of her employment against 
the post of Professor of Urdu which cannot be approved of. 
35. 
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent-University 
adopted the plea that as the Syndicate did not approved the name of 
the petitioner for appointment against the post of Professor of Urdu, 
she cannot claim appointment against the said post as a matter of 
right. To appreciate the contention of learned counsel for the 
respondent-University, I have gone through Agenda Item No.3 
relating to case of Dr. Azmat Rubab, Associate Professor wherein it 
was inter-alia resolved as under:- 
“However, the members of the Syndicate recommended 
that 
the 
Chancellor 
may 
kindly 
approve 
the 
appointment of Dr. Rehana Kausar as Professor Urdu 
as per decision of 57th Selection Board and her joining 
would be after the approval of Chancellor / Governor 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--40-- 
 
 
 
decision. While in case of Dr. Azmat Rubab, the members 
of Syndicate recommended that the re-evaluation from 
the external evaluator should be done as her negative 
previous external reports were presented before the 
members of 57th Selection Board, which were used for the 
interview of Professor, advertised in December, 2017, 
where the both candidates were not recommended.” 
(emphasis provided) 
The afore-quoted portion from the minutes of 81st meeting of the 
Syndicate renders it vividly clear that the name of the petitioner was 
approved for appointment against the post of Professor of Urdu, thus 
no contrary inference can be drawn at the whims of the University 
Authorities.  
36. 
Now coming to the contempt petition, the grievance of the 
petitioner was that despite injunctive order issued by this Court, the 
University Authorities were all out to make recruitment against the 
post, subject matter of the titled Writ Petition.  Since the main Writ 
Petition, out of which the contempt petition has arisen, has been 
decided, in my humble opinion no further proceedings are required in 
this petition.  
37. 
Now coming to the case-law referred by the learned counsel for 
the respondent-University, I am of the view that the same is 
inapplicable to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case 
inasmuch as in the case of Federation of Pakistan through Secretary 
Establishment Division, Islamabad and another (supra), the question 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--41-- 
 
 
 
mainly revolved around promotion/proforma promotion whereas the 
question involved in the present Writ Petition relates to appointment 
of the petitioner pursuant to an advertisement got published by the 
University. Similarly, in the case of Secretary Establishment Division, 
Government of Pakistan, Islamabad (supra), the question pertained to 
the power of the appointing authority to return the cases of the civil 
servants, whose names were recommended by the Selection Board, 
which has no connectivity with the matter in hand inasmuch as 
according to the Ordinance, 2002 and the service Statutes made 
thereunder, though the Syndicate can differ with the recommendations 
of the Selection Board but cannot send them back to Selection Board 
for review rather the proper course is to put up the matter before the 
Chancellor for final decision.  Now coming to the case of Syed 
Muhammad Arif and others (supra), I am of the view that in the said 
case the recommendations of the Selection Board were not approved 
by the Syndicate and the aggrieved persons approached Balochistan 
High Court challenging the decision of the Syndicate whereas in the 
present case not only the Selection Board recommended the name of 
the petitioner in its 57th meeting but also the Syndicate in its 81st 
meeting approved the name of the petitioner for appointment against 
the subject post, thus the said case is polls apart from the referred 
case. As far as case of Dr. Habibur Rehman (supra) is concerned, 
suffice it to note that in the said case the aggrieved person challenged 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--42-- 
 
 
 
the recommendations of the Public Service Commission despite 
having appeared in the subsequent recruitment held by the said forum 
whereas in the instant matter, the petitioner has been agitating the 
issue relating to her appointment as Professor of Urdu, since the year 
2018. 
38. 
As a necessary corollary to the discussion made herein above, I 
have no hesitation to hold that that the case of the petitioner has not 
been dealt with by the University Authorities in line with the 
provisions of the Ordinance, 2002 and the Service Statutes made 
thereunder.  Consequently, this petition is accepted and impugned 
order, dated 17.01.2023, passed by the Chancellor and subsequent 
Notifications, dated 04.07.2023 and 04.09.2023, are set aside.  As a 
result, the Vice Chancellor (respondent No.2) is directed to issue 
appointment letter in favour of the petitioner as per approval by the 
Syndicate in its 81st meeting.  No order as to costs. 
39. 
Now coming to the contempt petition, no further proceedings 
are required therein, consequently, the same is disposed of. 
40. 
Before parting with this judgment, it would like to laud the 
professional conduct of the learned counsel for the parties during 
hearing of these matters, in particular that of Mr. Gohar Mustafa 
Qureshi, Advocate representing the respondent-University, who 
instead of covering the follies of the University Authorities, frankly 

 
 
 
W.P. No.57365/2023. 
--43-- 
 
 
 
considered that there were certain loopholes on their part while 
dealing with the case of the petitioner for appointment against the post 
of Professor Urdu.  
            
 
 
 
 
       (Shujaat Ali Khan) 
 
     
                      
                      Judge  
 
 
Announced in open court today i.e. 07.06.2024  
 
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                              Judge 
M.Tahir* 
 
 
                       

