StereoHCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.68366 of 2023 
 
 
Wajid Ali.    Vs.   The Govt. of Punjab & others.  
 
JUDGMENT 
 
Date of hearing: 
 
19.04.2024. 
Petitioner by:  
M/s Naveed Ahmad Khawaja and Ch. 
Muhammad Sarwar, Advocates for the 
petitioner in this petition as well as in Crl. 
Org. No.80328-W of 2023. 
Mr. Usman Ilyas Qureshi, Advocate for 
the petitioner in W.P. No.60404 of 2023. 
 
Respondents by: 
Rana 
Shamshad 
Khan, 
Additional 
Advocate-General, 
Punjab, 
alongwith 
Muhammad 
Atif, 
Section 
Officer 
(Archives) S&GAD. 
 
Shujaat Ali Khan J: -  
C.M. No.3 of 2023. 
The applicant, Mr. Junaid Sattar Butt (petitioner in W.P. 
No.60404 of 2023 hereinafter to be referred as “the applicant”) 
has filed this application under Order 1 rule 10 CPC seeking his 
impleadment in the array of the respondents and for striking out 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--2-- 
names of respondents No.1, 3 & 4 in W.P. No.68366 of 2023 
(this petition). 
2. 
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the applicant 
states that since his client filed W.P. No.60404 of 2023 
(connected petition) much prior to filing of this petition, he is a 
necessary party in this petition. Further adds that when the 
intent of the applicant is to safeguard the national exchequer, he 
is entitled to be impleaded as a party in the public interest. 
3. 
While opposing this application, learned counsel 
representing Wajid Ali (petitioner in this petition—hereinafter 
to be referred as “the petitioner”) submits that in this petition 
the petitioner has claimed regularization of his services with 
which the applicant has no concern rather such question is to be 
decided by the departmental authorities, hence, he cannot be 
allowed to join as a party in this petition.  
4. 
Learned Law Officer, while opposing this application, 
submits that the applicant, being alien to the question of 
regularization, cannot be arrayed as a party. 
5. 
After hearing learned counsel for the applicant and the 
petitioner as well as learned Law Officer, I have noted that the 
applicant has filed this application seeking his impleadment in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--3-- 
this petition and striking out names of respondents No.1, 3 & 4 
in this petition. The sole reason advanced by the applicant, in 
support of this application, is that he filed the connected 
petition prior to filing of this petition, thus, he is a necessary 
party. There is no cavil with the proposition that when a person 
falls within the definition of a „necessary party‟ or „proper 
party‟, he can be added as a party in a lis by a court, even 
without filing of a formal application in that regard. Since the 
applicant has no concern with prayer made by the petitioner in 
this petition, thus, the applicant is neither a necessary nor 
proper party. 
6. 
Now coming to the prayer of the applicant for striking 
out names of respondents No.1, 3 & 4, I am of the view that 
respondent No.1, being administrative head in the Civil 
Secretariat, cannot be considered as unnecessary party. 
Likewise, impleadment of respondent No.3 is necessary to 
decide the question, relating to regularization of services of the 
petitioner, vis-à-vis financial intricacies and respondent No.4 
being immediate Supervisory Officer of the petitioner has 
rightly been impleaded in this petition.  
7. 
For what has been discussed above, I see no force in this 
application which is hereby dismissed. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--4-- 
MAIN CASE 
8. 
Through this single judgment, I intend to decide this 
petition, the connected petition and Crl.Org.No.80328-W of 
2023 (contempt petition) having commonality of law and facts.  
9. 
Briefly put, the facts, as spelt out in this petition, are that 
pursuant to an advertisement, got published by the Punjab 
Public Service Commission (PPSC), pursuant to the requisition 
sent by the Secretary, Archives & Libraries Wing, S&GAD, 
Lahore (respondent No.2), the petitioner applied against the 
post of Assistant Director (Records) BS-17. Upon conclusion of 
the recruitment process, appointment of the petitioner was 
recommended by the PPSC to respondent No.2, through 
Communication, dated 28.01.2020. Resultantly, the petitioner 
was appointed against the aforesaid post, on contract basis for a 
period of three years through Appointment Order, dated, 
04.03.2020 and he assumed the charge of the post on 
09.03.2020. Since the petitioner completed three years‟ 
mandatory service, he made various requests before the 
competent authority for regularization of his services in the 
light of the Punjab Regularization of Service Act, 2018 (the 
Act, 2018) but as the same were given deaf ear, the petitioner 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--5-- 
has filed this petition seeking regularization of his services 
against the subject post. 
10. 
Insofar as the factual background of the connected 
petition is concerned, the applicant has prayed for issuance of 
writ of quo-warranto against the petitioner (respondent No.8 
the connected petition). 
11. 
As far as contempt petition is concerned, the petitioner 
has agitated non-compliance of order, dated 17.10.2023, passed 
by this Court, under C.M. No.2 of 2023, in this petition.  
12. 
Mr. Naveed Ahmad Khawaja, Advocate, representing the 
petitioner submits that since the petitioner was appointed 
against the subject post on the recommendations of PPSC, 
respondent No.2 was bound to regularize his services in terms 
of section 4 of the Act 2018; that mere pendency of complaints 
could not be used to deny regularization to the petitioner; that 
mala fide conduct of the respondents is evinced from the fact 
that though the petitioner continued to serve the department till 
the year 2023 but they turned down his request for 
regularization on the ground that since he was no more in 
service, he was not entitled for regularization of his services; 
that if the petitioner was not in service, at the time of filing this 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--6-- 
petition, as to how monthly salaries were transferred in his bank 
account pursuant to pay slips for the months of September and 
October 2023; that it is a case of clear discrimination inasmuch 
as services of many other similarly placed persons, whose 
contracts were not only expired but the same were also not 
extended, were regularized whereas same relief has been denied 
to the petitioner; that satisfactory service of the petitioner can 
be affirmed from the comments, recorded by his superiors, in 
his Annual Confidential Reports (ACRs) and that contemptuous 
conduct of respondent No.2 is evinced from the fact that though 
this Court through order, dated 17.10.2023, restrained the 
respondents from dispensing with services of the petitioner but 
he was stopped to work after second day of November, despite 
having knowledge about the said order.  
13. 
In support of connected petition, learned counsel for the 
applicant submits that since the petitioner was deputed against 
the post meant for PMS Officers, he was not eligible for posting 
against the subject post and that as the petitioner did not fall 
within the category of PMS Officers, he could not be appointed 
as Drawing and Disbursing Officer (DDO), hence, connected 
petition deserves acceptance.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--7-- 
14. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner, while opposing 
connected petition, submits that since the petitioner was 
deputed against the post of Section Officer by respondent No.2, 
being the competent authority, he had no other option but to 
comply with the orders passed by the competent authority; that 
since the petitioner was posted as DDO with the approval of the 
Finance Department, the applicant has no cheeks to raise any 
objection in that regard; that the applications/complaints, filed 
against the petitioner, having been found false and frivolous, 
the same could not be used to deny regularization to the 
petitioner and that contumacious conduct of the applicant is 
established from the fact that though he is civil servant but he 
was found involved in active practice before this court while 
concealing his official job whereupon criminal case bearing FIR 
No.459/2024 has been registered against him, on 25.01.2024, at 
Police Station Civil Lines, Lahore, in respect of offences under 
sections 419, 420, 468 & 471 PPC read with the provisions of 
the Legal Practitioners and Bar Councils Act, 1973 and that the 
applicant is in the habit of filing frivolous complaints against 
his superiors and co-employees and upon conclusion of 
departmental proceedings initiated against him inter alia on the 
allegations of filing frivolous complaints against the co-

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--8-- 
employees,  through Office Order, dated 12.01.2024, issued by 
respondent No.2, penalty of stoppage of annual increment for 
five year and reduction to three lower stages in his pay scale for 
a period of five years has been imposed against him.   
15. 
Learned Law Officer, while opposing this petition, states 
that since no final order has been passed by the competent 
authority, the same is premature. Adds that it is in the fitness of 
things that the matter be referred to respondent No.4, being the 
competent 
authority, 
to 
decide 
question 
relating 
to 
regularization of services of the petitioner with specific 
reference to the point of discrimination. Further adds that in the 
event of any adverse order by the competent authority in 
relation to regularization of his services, the petitioner would be 
equipped with alternate remedy of appeal, hence no interference 
is called for in these proceedings.  
16. 
In relation to connected petition, learned Law Officer 
states that since the petitioner is no more in service, connected 
petition for all intents and purposes has become infructuous.  
17. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at 
considerable length and have also gone through the documents, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--9-- 
appended with these petitions in addition to the case-law cited 
at the bar. 
18. 
Firstly, taking up the plea of the learned Law Officer that 
since no order has been passed by the competent authority, 
matter be referred back to it, I am of the view that in the 
ordinary circumstances, firstly the competent authority should 
deal with the issue relating to regularization of an employee but 
when the respondents, in particular respondent No.2 (the 
competent authority), have opposed the paryer of the petitioner 
in this petition tooth and nail and in the light of the conduct 
portrayed in the succeeding paragraphs, referring the matter 
back to the competent authority would not serve any useful 
purpose rather it would be an exercise in futility. In this 
backdrop, I do not agree with the suggestion floated by the 
learned Law Officer. 
19. 
It is admitted position that the petitioner was appointed 
against the post of Assistant Director (Records) in the Archives 
& Libraries Wing of S&GAD upon recommendation of the 
PPSC. Section 4 of the Act 2018 deals with procedure relating 
to regularization of services of a contract employee which for 
convenience of reference is reproduced herein below:- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--10-- 
4.   Procedure for regularization.– (1) The case of a 
contract employee appointed on the recommendations of 
the Commission shall be submitted to the appointing 
authority for regularization without reference to the 
Commission or the Scrutiny Committee. 
(2)  If the post falls within the purview of the Commission 
but the contract employee was appointed otherwise than 
on the recommendations of the Commission, the case 
shall be referred to the Commission for recommendations 
Provided that notwithstanding anything contained 
in this subsection and subject to section 3 of the 
Act, the Chief Minister may, in relaxation of the 
provisions of the relevant rules, in the public 
interest, specify posts and regularize the services 
of the contract employees, without reference the 
case to the Commission.] 
(3)  If the post is outside the purview of the Commission, 
the case of a contract employee shall be placed before 
the Scrutiny Committee constituted under the Act for 
recommendations. 
According to subsection (1) of the afore-quoted provision, the 
case of a contract employee, appointed on the recommendations 
of the PPSC, is to be submitted to the competent authority for 
regularization. Insofar as matter of the petitioner is concerned 
respondent No.4 put up the matter of the petitioner for 
regularization before respondent No.2 with positive note but 
instead of regularization of services of the petitioner, 
respondent No.2 referred matter to different subordinates for 
inquiry/opinion in utter disregard to section 4 ibid. The matter 
did not end there as respondent No.2 did not regularize the 
services of the petitioner despite favourable recommendations 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--11-- 
by the authorities to whom matter was referred by him. This 
fact alone is sufficient to believe that respondent No.2 failed to 
perform his duties in line with the provisions of section 4 ibid. 
20. 
Brain Drain is one of the burning issues being faced by 
the country in these days. In my humble opinion, beside other 
factors the maltreatment towards the persons selected through 
competitive process, at the hands of the persons at the helm of 
the affairs in government departments, in respect of their future 
prospects and refusal to grant their rights is the main reason. 
The dismal picture of the affairs portrayed herein shows that the 
respondents are trying their hard to keep the petitioner aloof 
from the benefit of regularization of his services despite the fact 
that his case was not only covered under the provisions of the 
Act, 2018 but was also recommended by the immediate 
supervisory officer for more than once. If the issue of brain 
drain is to be redressed, such like acts should be deprecated and 
the lawful rights of the citizens should be given to them even 
without interference of the Courts.  
21. 
The sole reason advanced by the respondents, in their 
report and parawise comments, opposing request of the 
petitioner for regularization, is that he was not in service after 
08.09.2023. The said stance of the respondents stands belied 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--12-- 
from the contents of the documents, placed on record by the 
petitioner through miscellaneous application (C.M.No.1 of 
2024) in this petition. The said documents contain letter, dated 
02.10.2023, addressed by him to the Additional Secretary 
(Admn.), Government of the Punjab, S&GAD and letter dated 
03.10.2023 addressed by him to the Section Officer (Accounts-
II/NG), Government of the Punjab, S&GAD. The said 
communications are imaged below for ready reference: - 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--13-- 
Moreover, monthly salary slips for the months of September 
and October 2023 were not only issued to the petitioner but 
salary was also transferred in his bank account. For 
convenience of reference, salary slips of the petitioner for the 
above-said months are imaged below:- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--14-- 
 
The contents of the afore-imaged documents are sufficient to 
denounce claim of the respondents that the petitioner was not in 
service at the time of filing of this petition before this Court, on 
16.10.2023. If the petitioner was not in service after 08.09.2023 
as claimed by the respondents, as to how petitioner could 
address such important communications to different authorities 
against the wishes of the competent authority.  
22. 
It is important to mention over here that Article 4 of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--15-- 
mandates that every citizen should be dealt with in accordance 
with law. Undeniably, the relevant law in the matter of the 
petitioner was/is the Act, 2018 which envisages that a contract 
employee, who completes three years of service, is entitled to 
regularization but inaction on the part of respondent No.2 to 
regularize services of the petitioner in line with the provisions 
of the said enactment constitutes willful defiance of the 
fundamental right of the petitioner guaranteed under the afore-
referred provision of the Constitution. The conduct of 
respondent No.2 denying regularization to the petitioner entails 
stern action. 
23. 
It is relevant to note that Article 25 of the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 provides shield against 
any kind of discrimination by the authorities at the helm of 
affairs of the government or its institutions. Any act of 
discrimination on the part of the administrative authorities has 
been deprecated by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the cases 
reported as Ejaz Akbar Kasi v. Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting (PLD 2011 S.C. 22) in the following words:- 
“4. 
Be that as it may, we are not inclined to agree to 
the reasons which prevailed upon the Board in not 
regularizing the Group 4, 5 and 6 when at the same 
time the employees of other Groups as noted 
hereinabove were regularized beside other individual 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--16-- 
persons whose names have also been mentioned 
hereinbefore. This Court has laid down a criteria in 
respect of such employees who have somehow identical 
contentions in the case of Ikram Bari and others v. 
National Bank of Pakistan through President and 
another (2005 SCMR 100). Therefore, we are of the 
opinion that the case of the petitioners deserves to be 
considered by the Board of Directors for the reasons 
noted hereinabove as they cannot be discriminated 
without any cogent reason by violating the provisions 
of Article 25 of the Constitution and at the same time 
after having spent a considerable period of their lives 
in the Organization performing duties on contract 
basis. It is also the duty of the Organization to protect 
their fundamental rights enshrined in Article 9 of the 
Constitution.” 
 
Insofar as the case in hand is concerned, discriminatory attitude 
of the respondents is established from the fact that on the one 
hand the petitioner has been denied regularization on the point 
that he was not in service after 08.09.2023 as his period of 
contract was never extended thereafter but on the other 
regularized the services of Syed Muhammad Awais Abid, 
Junior Clerk (BS-11) through order, dated 03.03.2023 despite 
the fact that his period of contract expired on 28.01.2023 and 
the same was not extended any further. Likewise, services of 
one Muhammad Adil, Research Officer (BS-17), appointed for 
three years through Office Order, 01.03.2017, were regularized 
through Office Order, dated 29.04.2020, despite the fact that his 
contract expired at the end of February, 2020. For facilitate of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--17-- 
reference, appointment as well as regularization letters of the 
aforesaid persons are imaged below: - 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--18-- 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--19-- 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--20-- 
When confronted with the position, portrayed above, learned 
Law Officer has not been able to rebut the plea of learned 
counsel for the petitioner that the aforesaid persons were 
regularized on a date when their contracts were not intact and 
there have no distinguished feature as compared to the 
petitioner and those whose services have been regularized 
through afore-quoted letters.  
24. 
In the report and parawise comments, some of the 
respondents have adopted the plea that since certain complaints 
were filed against the petitioner, his services could not be 
regularized. The said stance of the department stands negated 
from the contents of the report, submitted by the Deputy 
Secretary (A&L), on 11.09.2023, wherein he concluded that the 
complaints, filed against the petitioner, were baseless and 
devoid of facts and endorsed the recommendations/proposals 
for regularization of services of the petitioner. Relevant portion 
from the report is reproduced herein below:- 
Findings 
1. 
 It is concluded that Mr. Wajid Ali while 
 
performing his duties as DDO  observed the 
 
relevant 
PPRA 
Rules 
and 
financial 
 
formalities against the 
expenditures made 
 
during the previous financial year 2022-23. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--21-- 
2.  
All the record has been maintained properly 
 
(in view of the audit to be conducted by 
 
the Audit authorities shortly). 
3. 
That the complaints made against him are 
 
baseless and devoid of facts. 
4.  
During scrutiny of record, the undersigned 
 
found no such irregularity which is of  serious 
 
nature. 
5.  
It is proposed that the complaints may be 
 
rejected, please. 
The above-quoted findings of Deputy Secretary (A&L), having 
not been challenged before any higher forum, had attained 
finality, thus, the contrary view adopted by some of the 
respondents in their report and parawise comments is not worth 
consideration. 
25. 
Even otherwise, mere pendency of a complaint/ 
application and that too by a co-employee, cannot be used to 
deny a vested right of a government servant whose performance 
otherwise has been assessed satisfactory. Further, when the 
performance of the petitioner was evaluated by his Reporting 
Officers while recording their remarks in his Annual 
Confidential Reports, respondent No.2 was not justified to refer 
the matter to different authorities to adjudge his suitability/ 
eligibility for regularization against the subject post.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--22-- 
26. 
Accumulative study of the material brought on record by 
the respondents in the shape of their report and parawise 
comments and other allied documents brings it to limelight that 
the applicant was all out to get the petitioner penalized. For the 
purpose, he instituted various complaints against the petitioner 
and his superiors. Being fed up with the attitude of the applicant 
towards filing frivolous complaints against his superiors and co-
employees, respondent No.2 being competent authority ordered 
for holding of an inquiry inter-alia into the allegation of filing 
frivolous complaints by the petitioner. Upon conclusion of the 
inquiry proceedings, the competent authority through Office 
Order, dated 12.01.2024, imposed multiple penalties against the 
applicant. Office Order, under discussion, for convenience of 
reference is imaged below: -  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--23-- 
 
 
If the authenticity of the complaints, filed by the applicant 
against the petitioner is seen in the light of the afore-quoted 
order, passed by respondent No.2, it becomes crystal clear that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--24-- 
the applicant being habitual complaint filer, his complaints 
could not be used against the petitioner to deny him the relief of 
regularization especially when the said complaints were found 
false and frivolous.  
27. 
The sluggish attitude of respondent No.2 is also evinced 
rom the fact that matter relating to regularization of services of 
the petitioner was put up before respondent No.2 by the 
Director, Archives & Libraries Wing (respondent No.4) with 
the following recommendations:- 
 
“The undersigned is immediate senior officer of 
A.D.(R) and I monitor his official working, conduct and 
performance. The undersigned has not found any 
negligence and misconduct committed by Mr. Wajid Ali. 
Moreover, Ex-Director (Archives) issued independently 
explanation letters, complaints and allegations etc. 
without my consent, report and approval of the 
competent authority. 
 
 
 
Now, Mr. Wajid Ali, A.D (Records) (BS-17) has 
fulfilled all the prerequisite mandatory conditions for 
regularization in service and he was appointed against a 
regular post of the department. His three years 
performance evaluation reports are satisfactory and no 
PEEDA enquiry is pending against him (Flag-E & F). 
 
 
 
 In view of above, it is submitted that the 
appointing authority of Mr. Wajid Ali, Assistant: 
Director (Records) is Secretary, Archives & Libraries 
Wing, S&GAD (Flag-G) and the worthy Secretary is the 
competent authority to grant approval for issuance of 
order of regularization in service of Mr. Wajid Ali, 
A.D.(Records) from the expiry date of his three year's 
contract 
w.e.f. 
09-03-2023 
under 
the 
Punjab 
Regularization of Service Act, 2018 read with Punjab 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--25-- 
Regularization of Service (Amendment) Ordinance, 2019 
(Flag-H). 
 
            
 Submitted for approval please. 
 
(Syeda Shamim Asghar Ali) 
Director (Archives) 
08-08-2023 
Though respondent No.2 had no authority to refuse 
regularization to the petitioner against the subject post but he 
directed to confirm his performance and conduct as DDO in the 
light of observations of the Inquiry Officer and his ex-Director 
but 
when 
the 
Deputy 
Secretary 
(A&L) 
endorsed 
recommendations 
contained 
in 
Para 
82-N 
regarding 
regularization of services of the petitioner then the Secretary 
malafidely did not pass any order thereon leaving he petitioner 
in lurch which fact alone speaks loud about failure of 
respondent No.2 towards performance of his duty in relation to 
regularization of services of the petitioner in the light of the 
provisions of the Act, 2018. 
28. 
It is important to mention over here that after issuance of 
injunctive order by this court on 17.10.2023, the petitioner 
submitted 
application 
before 
respondent 
No.2 
seeking 
permission to mark his attendance whereupon respondent No.2 
passed following order on 03.11.2023:- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--26-- 
“Maintain the status as it was at the time of the 
order of the Court” 
After passing the above-quoted order, respondent No.2 down-
marked the matter to Section Officer (Archives) who, instead of 
honouring the order issued by this Court coupled with the afore-
quoted order passed by respondent No.2, tried to mislead the 
competent authority as well as this Court by contending that 
since the petitioner was not in service at the time of filing of 
this petition the injunctive order issued by this court was 
inconsequential. Further, contumacious conduct of Section 
Officer (Archives) is also established from the fact that though 
application of the petitioner (C.M.No.1 of 2023) seeking 
permission to place on record additional documents was 
allowed by this court through order dated, 01.03.2024, but he 
tried to render the said order ineffective by submitting a report 
with his signatures on behalf of respondent No.2 before the 
HRC Wing of this Court, on 16.04.2024, which fact renders it 
crystal clear that the real perpetrator behind the agony of the 
petitioner is the said Section Officer who not only successfully 
deceived the competent authority in respect of matter relating to 
regularization of the petitioner but also tried to mislead this 
Court by active concealment or twisting of material facts.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--27-- 
29. 
There is no cavil with the fact that the respondents could 
file reply to the application, submitted by the petitioner or they 
could move for recalling of the order passed therein but they 
could not file any report in relation to the said application when 
the same was allowed by this Court, subject to all just and legal 
exceptions. Further, the documents attached therewith by the 
petitioner being public one, their impunity could not be allowed 
to be objected by the Section Officer, who was not party in this 
petition. Moreover, as no legal or just exception has been 
pointed by the learned Law Officer against entertaining of the 
additional documents, their authenticity cannot be disputed at 
the whims of a Section Officer, whose conduct throughout the 
proceedings before this Court was contumacious.  
30. 
It has not been denied by respondents‟ side that prior to 
the expiry of extended period of contract the case of the 
petitioner for regularization was put up before the competent 
authority with positive note. In this backdrop, the case of the 
petitioner was also covered under the principle of legitimate 
expectancy. The apex court of the country in the case of Dr. 
Naveeda Tufail and 72 others v. Government of Punjab and 
others (2003 SCMR 291) while dealing with the point relating 
to lawful expectancy of a contract employee, whose contract 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--28-- 
was earlier extended by the competent authority, for regular 
appointment, has inter alia held as under:-  
“12.***** The authorities in the Education Department, 
Government of Punjab, while adopting the method of ad 
hoc appointments as a continuous, policy, created a 
legitimate expectancy in the mind of petitioners for their 
retention on regular; basis and therefore, we deem it 
proper to direct that the respondents while seeking 
guidance from the scheme of regularization of ad hoc 
employees of Federal Government referred above, will 
initiate the process of regularization of the petitioners 
through Punjab Public Service Commission giving the 
concession as mentioned in the reply filed by the 
respondents in the Punjab Service Tribunal within a 
period of one month and meanwhile without prejudice to 
tile right of the selectees of the Public Service 
Commission for appointment on regular basis, the posts 
which were being held by the petitioners shall not be 
filled…… 
Further, this Court in the case of Mst. Ghulam Zuhra Jahangir 
and another v. Vice-Chancellor, University of the Punjab, 
Lahore and 8 others (2020 PLC(CS) 285) while dilating upon 
the issue, under discussion, has inter alia observed as under:- 
“Such extension in the tenure of service of the petitioners 
has undeniably created a legitimate expectancy in their 
mind with reference to their retention in the service on 
regular basis. Otherwise it is matter of serious concern 
that a person who has already served 10 years in 
institution governed by the Government if thrown out 
from the service, at this juncture of time meaning thereby 
he would be deprived of any service in any of the 
institution under the government due to age and would 
tantamount to discrimination as some of the co-employee 
have already been regularized and the case of the 
petitioners is squarely hit by Article 25 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--29-- 
If the case of the petitioner is adjudged in the light of the afore-
quoted judgments there leaves no ambiguity that principle of 
legitimate expectancy for regularization against the post held by 
him is fully attracted.  
31. 
The inconsistent conduct of respondent No.2 is 
established from the fact that on the one hand while filing the 
report and parawise comments in this petition, he opposed the 
prayer of the petitioner for regularization on the premise that he 
being not in service after 08.09.2023, was not entitled for 
regularization but on the other gauged his service as satisfactory 
while recording his remarks in the Annual Confidential Reports 
of the petitioner. Further when respondent No.2 imposed major 
penalties against the applicant inter-alia on account of filing 
frivolous complaints against his seniors and co-employees, the 
complaints filed by the applicant could not be used to the dis-
interest of the petitioner depriving him of his regularization.  
32. 
Insofar as registration of criminal case against the 
applicant is concerned, suffice it to note that the same having no 
connectivity with the subject-matters of these petitioners, this 
Court knowingly restraining itself to comment upon the said 
matter lest it may prejudice the case of either side before the 
relevant forum. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.68366 of 2023. 
 
 
--30-- 
33. 
Now coming to the connected petition, I have noted that 
since the petitioner is no more in service, the connected petition 
for all intents and purposes has become infructuous, thus, no 
further proceedings are required therein.  
34. 
As far as contempt petition is concern, though I have 
observed willful defiance of order, passed by this Court, on 
17.10.2023, in this petition under C.M. No.2 of 2023 but using 
maximum restraint I am not initiating contempt proceedings 
against the respondents.  
35. 
For what has been discussed above, this petition is 
accepted and respondent No.2 is directed to extend the contract 
period of the petitioner w.e.f. 09.08.2023 and issue formal letter 
qua regularization of his services with effect from completion 
of three years of his service from the date of his initial 
appointment, upon fulfillment of all codal formalities.  
36. 
Insofar as connected petition and contempt petition 
are concerned, the same are disposed of with no order as to 
costs.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
Approved for Reporting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
Jamil* 

