     Form No.HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
 
    IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT  
MULTAN BENCH MULTAN 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
W. P. No.755 of 2024 
Beaconhouse School System, Okara      Versus   Commissioner Sahiwal Division, etc. 
 
S.No. of order/ 
Proceeding 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of parties or counsel, 
where necessary. 
 
 
 
   
01.02.2024  
Mahr Haseeb Qadir, Advocate for the petitioner.  
 
Syed Wajid Hussain Rizvi, Assistant Advocate General, 
Punjab with Mushtaq Ahmad Sial, DPI (SE) and Wazir 
Ahmad Agha, CEO(DEA), Okara. 
 
Mr.Shakeel Javed Chaudhry, Advocate/Legal Advisor 
of BISE, Sahiwal.  
 
 
In this petition under Article 199 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 
(‘Constitution’), the petitioner has assailed the orders 
dated 29.11.2023 and 29.12.2023 passed by the Chief 
Executive 
Officer/Secretary, 
District 
Registering 
Authority, Okara (‘DRA’) and the Commissioner, 
Sahiwal Division, Sahiwal respectively whereby its 
request for the issuance of School Registration 
Certificate/E-License for Beaconhouse School System 
Boys & Girls branches Okara was turned down and 
appeal preferred there-against was dismissed.  A 
direction has also been sought for issuance of School 
Registration Certificate/E-License of the petitioner’s 
school for affiliation with the Board of Intermediate & 
Secondary Education (BISE) Sahiwal and allowing its 
students to participate in the Board’s examination. 
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner mainly 
contends that in order to give effect to the obligation 
under section 13(b) of the Punjab Free and Compulsory 

2 
                                     W. P. No.755 of 2024 
Education Act, 2014 (‘the Act’), rules were required to 
be framed under section 24(2) of the Act which have 
not been framed and notified by the Government till 
date and in absence thereof penal action has been 
invoked by the DRA and maintained by the 
Commissioner against the petitioner without lawful 
authority.  
3. 
Conversely, the Chief Executive Officer, DRA 
states that although no rules have been framed by the 
Government for the purpose of enforcement of section 
13(b) of the Act,  however, all notable schools in the 
Okara District have complied with the requirements on 
their own and if petitioner furnishes information in 
similar terms, the District Registration Authority shall 
extend the school registration of the petitioner 
forthwith.  
4. 
Learned Legal Advisor of BISE, Sahiwal states 
that if the school registration of the petitioner is 
extended by the DRA Okara, according to his 
instructions every effort shall be made by the Board to 
enroll students of the petitioner’s school for the 
Secondary School Certificate Examination, 2024 
without any further loss of time. 
5. 
Representative 
of 
the 
School 
Education 
Department, present in Court, states that draft of the 
rules has been framed and submitted to the Law 
Department which has suggested a few changes therein 
and the same shall be notified if some time is allowed. 
6. 
Heard.     
7. 
Access to free and compulsory education is a 
universally acknowledged right of all children. It is a 
sine qua non for the development of any State in 
addition to ensuring equality of opportunity for its 

3 
                                     W. P. No.755 of 2024 
citizens and their right to live with dignity. In the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, such right has been 
included amongst the fundamental rights contained in 
Chapter 1 of Part II of the Constitution through the 
Eighteenth Constitutional Amendment. Fundamental 
rights occupy a place of pride in the scheme of our 
Constitution and the same indeed are conscience of the 
Constitution1.  By insertion of Article 25-A of the 
Constitution, an obligation has been cast upon the State 
to ensure provision of the free and compulsory 
education to all children between the age of 5 to 16 
years in such a manner as may be determined by law.  
The subject of education has been devolved to the 
provinces for legislation and decisions regarding 
curriculum, syllabus, planning, policy and standard of 
education. 
Accordingly, 
the 
Punjab 
Free 
and 
Compulsory Education Act, 2014 was enacted.  
Preamble of the Act reads as under:-  
“An Act to provide for free and compulsory education 
to all children of the age of five to sixteen years. 
Whereas Article 25A of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan enjoins that the State shall 
provide free and compulsory education to all children 
of the age of five to sixteen years and, for the purpose, 
it is expedient to make necessary provisions” 
 
8. 
Section 13 of the 
Act describes certain 
responsibilities of private schools for ensuring free 
education.  The said section is reproduced hereunder: -   
“13. Responsibility 
of 
private 
school 
for 
free education.– For purposes of this Act, a private 
sector school: 
(a)     specified in sub-clause (ii) of clause (k) of 
section 2, shall provide free education to 
such proportion of children admitted 
therein as its annual aid or grant so 
received bears to its annual recurring 
expenses; 
                                                 
1 Miss Benazir Bhutto vs. Federation of Pakistan and another (PLD 1988 Supreme Court 416) 

4 
                                     W. P. No.755 of 2024 
(b)   specified in sub-clauses (iii) and (iv) of 
clause (k) of section 2, shall admit in class 
one and then in every class, ten percent of 
the strength of that class, children, 
including disadvantaged children of the 
neighbourhood or other children as may be 
determined by the Government, and shall 
provide free and compulsory education to 
such children or, in the alternative, provide 
prescribed vouchers for education of 
disadvantaged children in any other school, 
as may be determined by the Government; 
(c)   shall provide the information pertaining to 
the students admitted under clauses (a) and 
(b) to the Government, the local authority 
or any other prescribed authority; and 
(d)  shall not require a parent to purchase 
textbooks, uniform or other material from a 
particular vendor or provider and shall not 
charge any amount other than tuition fee, 
admission fee or prescribed security in the 
name and style of building fund or under 
any other name or style.” 
 
9. 
Section 2 of the Act, inter alia, defines “child”, 
“education”, “disadvantaged child”, “free education” 
and “school” in the following terms:- 
“2. Definitions.– In this Act: 
 
(a) 
“child” means a child from the age of five to 
sixteen years; 
 
(c) 
“disadvantaged child” means a child who 
belongs to a socially and economically 
disadvantaged class or to any other group 
having disadvantage owing to social, or such 
other reasons or who belongs to such a 
parent whose annual income is less than the 
limit which the Government may, by 
notification, specify; 
(d) 
“education” means teaching and training of 
mind and character by attendance in regular 
school 
education, 
madrassa 
education,  
vocational training and special education in 
the classroom and school setting, or non-
formal education or the education prescribed 
for a child or category of children by the 
Government; 
(e) 
“free 
education” 
implies 
that 
the 
Government or local authority shall not 
charge any fee or expense for providing 

5 
                                     W. P. No.755 of 2024 
education and shall endeavour to remove 
financial barriers that may prevent a child 
from completing ten years’ education.  
(k)    
“school” means an educational institution 
imparting primary, elementary or secondary 
education to the children and includes: 
 
(i)   a school owned or controlled by the 
Government or a local authority; 
(ii)   a school receiving aid or grant to meet 
whole or part of its expenses from the 
Government, Federal Government or a 
local authority; 
(iii)  a school not receiving any kind of aid or 
grant from the Government, Federal 
Government or a local authority; and 
(iv) a Deeni madrassa or any school 
providing 
religious 
education 
recognized by the Government.” 
 
10. There are certain features in the above provisions 
which are required to be determined by the Government 
and in that regard section 24 of the Act empowers the 
Government to make rules for carrying out purposes of 
the Act as follows:- 
“24.       Power 
to 
make rules.–    (1)  The 
Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
    (2)  In particular, and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for any of the following matters: 
(a)      manner of maintenance of records 
of children; 
(b)       criteria 
for 
determination 
of 
disadvantage children or payment 
of vouchers; 
(c)       the area or limits for establishment 
of a neighbourhood school; 
(d)       extended period for admission of a 
child and the manner of completing 
study by the child if admitted after 
the extended period; 
(e)       academic calendar; 
(f)       duties to be performed by the 
teachers; 
(g)       the 
manner 
of 
redressing 
grievances of teachers, students or 
any other person; 
(h)       the manner of giving opportunity of 
hearing under this Act;  

6 
                                     W. P. No.755 of 2024 
(i)        receipt of contribution, utilization 
and withdrawal of money from 
the Taleem Fund; and 
(j)        maintenance and audit of accounts; 
 
11. 
From perusal of the above provisions of law, it is 
manifest that without framing rules, inter alia, to outline 
criteria for the determination of disadvantaged children 
or payment of vouchers and the manner of maintenance 
of records of children under clauses (a) & (b) of section 
24(2) of the Act, any claim of compliance of obligations 
under section 13 of the Act would remain subjective, 
open to objections and disputes. Certainty lies at the 
heart of rule of law. Any vagueness or uncertainty in 
prescribing legal obligations opens the doors for 
whimsical, arbitrary and capricious exercise of 
authority.  Law has to be reasonably precise and 
unambiguous to attract penal consequences for its 
alleged violation.  It is for this recognition on part of the 
provincial legislature that the requirement to specify 
criteria for the determination of disadvantaged children 
or payment of vouchers and the manner of maintenance 
of records of children was mandated for the 
Government under clauses (a) & (b) of section 24(2) of 
the Act.  No redundancy could be attached to legislative 
expressions including the aforementioned provisions of 
section 24 ibid. 
12. 
It is noteworthy that legislation in this case was 
enacted by the Punjab Assembly in the year 2014 and 
this Court is at a complete loss in comprehending how 
the disadvantaged children could be denied their right to 
education, which is their fundamental right guaranteed 
under Article 25A of the Constitution,  owing to 
procrastination at the hands of the Government which 
failed to frame and notify rules in discharge of its 

7 
                                     W. P. No.755 of 2024 
responsibilities under clauses (a) and (b) of section 
24(2) of the Act. The private education sector, which 
was supposed to share the responsibility of right to 
education of disadvantaged children, has benefitted 
from inaction on part of the Government Departments 
even after the lapse of 10 years of passing of the Act.  
At best, it shows an obvious neglect of the Government 
whereas, at worst, it may well be a case of regulatory 
capture warranting inquiry. 
13. 
This Court would abstain from commenting on 
reliability of the information provided to the DRA by 
other schools in the District, however, it is observed that 
when criteria for the determination of disadvantaged 
children or payment of vouchers and manner of 
maintenance of records of children under clauses (a) & 
(b) of section 24(2) of the Act has not been prescribed, 
how could compliance of the same be verified and 
certified by any authority.   
14. 
For the foregoing reasons, while accepting this 
petition, the impugned orders dated 29.11.2023 and 
29.12.2023 are set aside. Consequently, District 
Registration Authority, Okara is directed to ensure 
registration of the petitioner-school if conditions other 
than those specified in section 13(b) of the Act are 
satisfied and the Board of Intermediate and Secondary 
Education, Sahiwal shall also ensure that students of the 
petitioner-school are duly registered for the SSC 
Examination 
2024 
without 
any 
further 
delay.  
Government of the Punjab is directed to fulfill its 
obligation to frame rules, inter alia, to prescribe the 
criteria for the determination of disadvantaged children 
or payment of vouchers and the manner of maintenance 
of records of children under clauses (a) & (b) of section 

8 
                                     W. P. No.755 of 2024 
24(2) of the Act within a period of 30 days whereafter it 
shall proceed for the enforcement of section 13 of the 
Act through penal actions in accordance with law. 
There shall be no order as to costs.  The Deputy 
Registrar (Judicial) of this Court shall immediately send 
a copy of this order to respondents No.5 & 6 for 
compliance.   
 
   (RAHEEL KAMRAN) 
                                  
 
                  JUDGE 
 
Approved for reporting 
  
 
 
      JUDGE 
 
 
*Saeed Akhtar* 
 

