StereoHCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No. 432 of 2017. 
 
Robina Kausar.     v.    Muhammad Latif.  
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
Date of hearing: 03.12.2024. 
 
Petitioners by: 
Mr. Muhammad Anwar Basit, Advocate. 
 
Respondent by: 
Mr. Muhammad Mumtaz Faridi, Advocate 
assisted by Ali Ahmad Sabir, Advocate.  
    
 
Shujaat Ali Khan, J: - Unnecessary details apart, the 
petitioner-mortgagor covenanted to mortgage land measuring 6-
Kanals, falling in Square No.37, Killa No.21, Chak No.317-GB, 
Toba Tek Singh, in favour of the respondent-mortgagee, vide 
agreement, dated 01.12.2006, in lieu of Rs.2,00,000/-, for a 
period from 01.12.2006 to 03.11.2008. In the agreement it was 
also incorporated that if the petitioner-mortgagor fails to repay 
the mortgaged amount, she would get the said land transferred 
in the name of the respondent-mortgagee. Since the petitioner-
mortgagor failed to repay the mortgaged amount, within 
prescribed period, the respondent-mortgagee filed suit inter-alia 
seeking specific performance of agreement, dated 01.12.2006 
with the averments that since petitioner-mortgagor had failed to 

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--2-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
repay the mortgage money, decree for specific performance be 
issued in his favour. Though, initially petitioner-mortgagor 
joined proceedings of the suit by filing Written Statement but 
subsequently disappeared, as a result she was proceeded against 
ex-parte and after recording ex-parte evidence the learned Civil 
Judge, Toba Tek Singh (learned Trial Court), decreed the suit 
vide ex-parte judgment & decree, dated 13.12.2013 against 
which the petitioner-mortgagor filed an appeal but without any 
success as the same was dismissed by the learned District 
Judge, Toba Tek Singh (learned Appellate Court) vide 
judgment, dated 23.01.2015; hence this revision petition.  
 
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner-mortgagor submits 
that while deciding the matter both the courts below failed to 
consider that as per section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act, 
1882 mortgagor can move for redemption of mortgaged 
property within the prescribed period of limitation irrespective 
of any penal clause mentioned in the mortgage deed; that 
section 23 of the Contract Act, 1872 determines as to which 
considerations are lawful and those are not acknowledged by 
the law as valid and according to the said provision any 
condition put against the parent law on the subject, is not 
sustainable; that as a matter of fact, suit of the respondent-

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--3-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
mortgagee was not maintainable rather he could sue against the 
petitioner for recovery of mortgage money in terms of section 
68 of Transfer of Property Act, 1882 but said important aspect 
of the matter escaped notice of the courts below; that even if the 
agreement is admitted to be valid, marginal witnesses of the 
said agreement having not been produced, no decree could be 
passed in favour of the respondent-mortgagee; that the 
respondent-mortgagee could move the civil court asserting his 
right in terms of section 67 of the Transfer of Property Act, 
1882 but suit for specific performance was not maintainable. To 
fortify his contentions, learned counsel has relied upon the 
cases reported as Mst. Naseem Akhtar and others v. Abdul 
Tawab and others (2012 SCMR 1526), Abdul Haq v. Ali Akbar 
and others (1999 SCMR 2531), Abdul Sattar v. Mst. Sardar 
Begum and 12 others (1992 SCMR 417), Khushi Muhammad 
and others v. Muhammad Ashfaq and others (PLD2014 LHR 
26), Muhammad Akhtar v. Mst. Siani (2011 CLC 1218), Abdul 
Lateef v. Ashique Ali and others (PLJ 2006 Karachi 127), 
Abdul Haq v. Ali Akbar and 12 others (1998 CLC 129) and 
Suleman and 3 others v. Custodian, Evacuee Property, West 
Pakistan, Lahore and 2 others (PLD 1971 LHR 77).  
3. 
Conversely, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent-mortgagee, while defending the impugned decisions 

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--4-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
of the courts below, submits that when the petitioner-
mortgagor, while filing written statement, admitted the 
execution of agreement between the parties, there was no 
compulsion for the respondent-mortgagee to produce its 
marginal witnesses; that mala-fide conduct of the petitioner-
mortgagor is evident from the fact that she filed application 
before the erstwhile Deputy District Officer (Revenue), Toba 
Tek Singh seeking permission to repay the mortgage money 
and redemption of mortgaged land but the same was dismissed 
due to her failure to deposit the said amount; that even during 
proceedings before the learned Trial Court the petitioner-
mortgagor offered to repay the mortgage money but after filing 
written statement she disappeared and ultimately ex-parte 
proceedings were initiated against her; that not only this 
petition has been filed beyond prescribed period of limitation 
but no court fee thereon has been affixed, thus, this petition is 
not proceedable rather deserves to be dismissed on that score 
alone and that concurrent findings of facts, recorded by the 
courts below, cannot be upset by this Court in exercise of its 
revisional jurisdiction.  
4. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at 
considerable length and have also gone through the documents, 

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--5-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
annexed with this petition, as well as the case-law, cited at the 
bar. 
5. 
Firstly, taking up the objection raised by the respondent-
mortgagee against maintainability of this petition on the point 
of limitation, I have observed that initially the petitioner-
mortgagor filed instant revision petition, on 22.04.2015, vide 
Diary No.41228. The Office raised multiple objections against 
maintainability of the said petition and ultimately fixed the case 
before the Court on 20.05.2015 as Objection Case when the 
Office Objection was sustained and matter was ordered to be 
filed. Later on, the petitioner-mortgagor filed two applications 
(C.M. Nos.1/C and 2/C of 2016), one for extension of time to 
remove the objection and second for condonation of delay in 
filing C.M. No.1/C of 2016. The said applications were allowed 
by this Court, vide order, dated 24.01.2017, which, for 
convenience of reference, is reproduced herein below: - 
“24.01.2017. 
Mr. M. Anwar Basit, Advocate for 
applicant. 
 
OFFICE OBJECTION 
IN C.M.No.1-C and 2-C of 2016. 
 
This is an application for extension of time for 
affixing 
the 
requisite 
court 
fee. 
Alongside 
this 
application, an application under Section 5 of the 
Limitation Act has also been filed. 

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--6-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
2.  
Learned counsel for the applicant submits that at 
the time of passing of order dated 20.05.2015, whereby 
office objection qua affixing the requisite court fee was 
upheld and the matter was filed, neither any intimation 
was sent to the petitioner or her counsel, nor an 
opportunity of hearing was afforded to them, therefore, 
the order is not sustainable. He has placed reliance on 
order dated 08.11.2016 passed by this Court in Office 
Objection in C.M.No.01-C/2016, in which in identical 
circumstances, the applicant was allowed enlargement of 
time for affixing the court fee. 
3.  
In view of the above, in order to maintain 
consistency, these applications are allowed; as a sequel 
to which applicant is granted 10 days' time to affix the 
requisite court fee. Once the needful is done, office shall 
number this petition and fix the same on the judicial 
side.” 
After acceptance of aforesaid applications, the Office allotted 
number to this revision petition. On 06.02.2017, pre-admission 
notice was issued to the respondent-mortgagee. Further, 
through order, dated 17.04.2019, this petition was admitted to 
regular hearing, which order, for facility of reference, is also 
reproduced herein below: - 
“17.04.2019 Mr. M. Anwar Basit, Advocate for the 
petitioner. 
Mr. Qadeer Ahmad Rana, Advocate for the 
respondent. 
 
This petition in terms of Section 115 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure (V of 1908) calls in question the 
judgment and decree dated 23rd January, 2015, whereby 
the learned District Judge, Toba Tek Singh, while 
dismissing the appeal filed by the petitioner affirmed the 
judgment and decree dated 13th December, 2013 passed 
by the learned Civil Judge Class-1, Toba Tek Singh. 
 

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--7-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
2.  
Learned counsel for the petitioner inter alia 
contends that the respondent instituted a suit for specific 
performance on the basis of a mortgage deed. Maintains 
that suit was not maintainable. Adds that the petitioner 
was proceeded ex- parte and suit was ultimately decreed 
as such vide judgment dated 13th December, 2013. 
Contends that the appeal was though filed before the 
learned District Judge but certain material aspects 
escaped notice of the learned Appellate Court. Submits 
that appeal was dismissed by way of impugned judgment 
and decree, which is not tenable under the law. Learned 
counsel on the strength of Section 60 of the Transfer of 
Property Act, 1882, contends that right of the petitioner 
under the mortgage deed cannot be extinguished in any 
circumstances. Emphasizes that the respondent could not 
claim any proprietary rights on the basis of a mortgage 
deed and as such suit was wrongly decreed by the courts 
below.  
 
3. 
The contentions of learned counsel for the 
petitioner has been seriously refuted by the latter, who 
submits that the suit was rightly decreed by the courts 
below and the appeal as well as revision is barred by 
time. 
 
4. 
In view of respective contentions of learned 
counsel for the parties, this petition is admitted for 
regular hearing subject to question of limitation. 
 
5. Notice. Latter accepts notice, so there is no need of 
issuance of any formal notice to this effect. Relist on 
14.06.2019. 
 
C.M. No.1-C of 2017 
6. Subject to notice for the aforesaid date, the 
respondents shall not further alienate the property in 
question, in the meanwhile. 
 
C.M. No.2-C of 2016 
7. This application in terms of Section 5 of the Limitation 
Act, 1908 seeks condonation of delay. 
 
8. Notice for the aforementioned date.” 
 

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--8-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
From the afore-quoted order, it is clear that C.M. No.2/C of 
2016 was treated as pending whereas said application having 
been allowed on 24.01.2017, was not open to fixation/hearing, 
thus, notice issued in said application, vide order, dated 
17.04.2019, seems to be result of some inadvertence. The Apex 
Court of the country, while dealing with a question relating to 
re-filing of a matter after removal of objection with reference to 
limitation, in the case of Mst. Sabiran Bi v. Ahmad Khan and 
another (2000 SCMR 847), has inter-alia observed as under: - 
“10. Thus, in view of above discussions we are inclined 
to hold that once a suit, appeal or revision has been 
presented before the authorised officer of the Court 
within the: prescribed period of limitation, it cannot be 
treated barred by time for the reason that the office has 
noted defects in the proceedings which have not been 
removed by the concerned party or his Advocate, and in 
such-like situation the Presiding Officer of the Court at 
the best can consider the maintainability of proceedings 
in view of the provisions of Order VII, Rule 11 or 
identical provisions available in the Code of Civil 
Procedure or the law under which the proceedings were 
instituted. It is also important to note that parties/ 
Advocates are also not absolved from their duty to 
remove the office objections within the stipulated period 
prescribed by the concerned authorised officer subject to 
the condition that specific notice has been served upon 
the party or Advocate to do the needful. Even if after 
notice the defect is not removed the case shall be listed 
for non-prosecution before the Presiding Officer who 
may in his discretion allow time to comply with 
objections of office.” 
The aforesaid view was also followed by a learned Division 
Bench of this Court in the case of Shazia Munawar v. Punjab 

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--9-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
Public Service Commission through Secretary, Lahore (PLD 
2010 Lahore 160) by inter-alia observing as under: - 
“13. In view of the aforesaid dictum of the Honourable 
Supreme Court of Pakistan it is clear and obvious that 
the appeal at hand having been filed within the 
prescribed period cannot be held to be barred by 
limitation. The Office should have placed the same before 
the Court to be dealt with in accordance with law. Even 
otherwise, the appellants cannot be accused of being 
contumacious or negligent, as the time taken for removal 
of the unclear objection was only 2/3 days more than the 
time allowed specially when it is not on record as to 
when or if notice in this behalf was issued to the 
appellant nor when and if the list of objection case was 
actually displayed by the Office. In view of the above, we 
have no hesitation in holding that I.-C.A. No.518 of 2008 
is not barred by limitation and has been filed within 
time.” 
If the objection raised by the respondent-mortgagee is seen in 
the light of the afore-referred judgments, there leaves no 
ambiguity that the date of filing of this petition is to be treated 
as 22.04.2015 for the reason that all the subsequent proceedings 
(prior to allocation of proper number to this petition) revolved 
around the Office Objection. In the given circumstances, the 
time consumed, while dealing with Office Objection, cannot be 
attributed to the petitioner especially when this Court allowed 
applications seeking extension of time to remove Office 
Objection and that for condonation of delay in filing application 
for extension of time.  

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--10-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
6. 
There is no cavil with the fact that a party is bound to 
remove objection within time prescribed by the Office but no 
penal action can be taken against it without issuing notice to the 
party concerned or to establish that the party concerned failed to 
do the needful despite having been put to notice. As far as the 
case in hand is concerned, suffice it to note that no notice was 
issued to the petitioner asking her to remove the office 
objection within specified period. Moreover, as discussed 
earlier, when the application of the petitioner-mortgagor 
seeking extension of time to remove the Office Objection was 
accepted and she removed the Office Objection, it does not lie 
in the mouth of the respondent to raise objection against the 
maintainability of this petition on the point of limitation.  
7. 
Considering from another angle, irrespective of the fact 
as to whether any application for codonation of delay has been 
filed or not, this Court, while deciding a revision petition, has to 
see validity of the decisions impugned before it and if the same 
are found to be untenable the question of limitation assumes 
secondary status. In this backdrop, the objection raised by 
learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
respondent-mortgagee 
against 
maintainability of this petition on the point of limitation is 
spurned. 

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--11-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
8. 
Now taking up the second objection of the respondent’s 
side against maintainability of this petition on account of non-
affixation of court fee, I am of the view that though initially the 
Office raised objection against maintainability of this petition 
inter-alia  on account of non-affixation of court fee but 
subsequently the petitioner-mortgagor provided the same after 
getting the same issued from the Treasury on 30.01.2017, thus 
the objection, under discussion, being without any substance 
cannot be given any weightage.   
9. 
Now reverting to merits of the case, I have noted that it is 
admitted position between the parties that the agreement 
(Exh.P/1) was executed in relation to mortgage of property 
described above. There is no cavil with the fact that an owner 
can mortgage his property but mortgagee has no right to get 
transferred the mortgaged property in his name through a 
decree for specific performance. If the mortgage money was not 
being returned by the petitioner-mortgagor, the respondent-
mortgagee could resort to remedy provided under section 67 of 
the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, which reads as under: - 
“67. Right to foreclosure or sale. In the absence of a 
contract to the contrary, the mortgagee has at any time 
after the mortgage money has become due to him, and 
before a decree has been made for the redemption of the 
mortgaged property, or the mortgage money has been 
paid or deposited as hereinafter provided, a right to 
obtain from the Court a decree that the mortgagor shall 

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--12-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
be absolutely debarred of his right to redeem the 
property, or a decree that the property be sold.  
A suit to obtain a decree that a mortgagor shall be 
absolutely debarred of his right to redeem the mortgaged 
property is called a suit for foreclosure……” 
From the above, it is crystal clear that the mortgagee can 
approach the Civil Court claiming that mortgagor be absolutely 
debarred of his right to get the mortgaged property redeemed or 
it can pray for decree for sale of the property but the recitals of 
the suit filed by the respondent-mortgagee speak otherwise. 
Further, section 12 of the Special Relief Act, 1877 deals with 
the cases wherein decree for specific performance can be 
granted. Insofar as the case in hand is concerned, admittedly, 
the respondent-mortgagee filed suit on the basis of penal clause 
in the mortgage agreement that if the petitioner-mortgagor fails 
to return the mortgage money, she would be bound to get 
transferred the mortgaged land in favour of respondent-
mortgagee. In my humble view, a suit for specific performance 
can be filed for enforcement of an agreement to sell but the 
same is not maintainable on the basis of a penal clause in an 
agreement, which otherwise does not fulfill the standards set for 
an agreement to sell. While dealing with question as to whether 
any penal clause in the agreement is enforceable, in a suit for 
specific performance, this Court in the case of Qari Muhammad 
Hanif v. Ihsan Ullah Khan (2010 CLC 706) while dealing with 

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--13-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
the proposition, under discussion, has inter-alia observed as 
under: - 
“10. Provision of section 74 of the Contract Act deals 
only with the rights to receive from the party who has 
broken a contract, a reasonable compensation and in 
absence of any contract, the mere fact that the 
appellant-defendant did not make payment of the 
amount within the time limit fixed by the suitor would 
not entitle him to attract the provisions of penal clause 
and claim the penalty. A penalty to claim double amount 
in fact, is not enforceable at law because the document 
Exh.P.1 and Exh.D.1 give a definite impression that these 
arrangements were made simply to recover the amount 
and nothing else, outstanding against the appellant-
defendant…….” (emphasis provided) 
If findings of the courts below are considered in the light of the 
afore-referred judgments there leaves no ambiguity that 
respondent-mortgagee was not entitled for decree for specific 
performance on the basis of penal clause in the mortgage deed. 
10. 
A cursory glance over the mortgage deed (Exh.P/1) 
shows that though it was executed in lieu of Rs.2,00,000/- but 
the same was not got registered despite the fact that the same 
was compulsorily registerable in terms of section 17 of the 
Registration Act, 1908. The Apex Court of the country in the 
case reported as Allah Diwaya v. Ghulam Fatima, Represented 
by Ahmad Sher and others (PLD 2008 SC 73) has held that 
when a document is compulsorily registerable and party 
concerned fails to do so, such document does not confer any 

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--14-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
right and such document is not enforceable under the law. 
Insofar as the case in hand is concerned, without registration of 
the mortgage deed inter-se rights and duties of the parties could 
not be enforced until and unless the mortgagee provided the 
requisite fee which was payable against registration of said 
document along with any penalty. Though the safer course for 
the learned trial court was to impound the mortgage deed and 
refuse to proceed further till the payment of requisite fee along 
with penalty (if any) but neither the trial court nor the appellate 
court attended to the said important aspect of the matter, thus 
the decisions rendered by them do not qualify the test set for a 
judicial decision.   
11. 
While assisting the Court, learned counsel appearing on 
behalf of the respondent-mortgagee put much emphasis on the 
fact that since the petitioner-mortgagor failed to repay the 
amount, even during pendency of proceedings before the 
Deputy District Officer (Revenue), Toba Tek Singh, in the 
application filed by her as well as during proceedings before the 
learned Trial Court, no interference is called for in these 
proceedings. In this regard, I am of the view that irrespective of 
any lapse on the part of the petitioner-mortgagor, the 
respondent-mortgagee was bound to establish that he was 
entitled for decree of specific performance on the basis of penal 

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--15-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
clause in the mortgage deed. Further, rights of the respondent-
mortgagee were to be governed under the relevant law, which 
in my humble estimation does not permit a mortgagee to bring a 
suit for specific performance on the basis of a penal clause in 
the mortgage deed/agreement.  
12. 
There is no denying the fact that concurrent findings of 
facts recorded by the courts below are rarely interfered with by 
this Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction but when the 
decisions of the fora below are arbitrary or suffer from material 
illegality, same cannot not be considered sacrosanct rather this 
court should not feel shy to undo the same. Reliance in this 
regard is placed on the case reported as Muhammad Aslam 
(deceased) through L.Rs. and another v. Molvi Muhammad 
Ishaq (deceased) through L.Rs and others (2024 SCMR 1390).   
13. 
For what has been noted above, I see no hesitation to 
hold that the suit filed by the respondent-mortgagee for specific 
performance on the basis of penal clause in the mortgage deed 
was not maintainable. Consequently, this revision petition is 
accepted and impugned judgments & decrees rendered by both 
the courts below are set aside. Resultantly, the suit filed by the 
respondent-mortgagee shall stand dismissed. No order as to 
costs.  

 
 
 
CR No. 432 of 2017. 
--16-- 
(Robina Kausar.  v. Muhammad Latif)       
 
 
14. 
Before parting with this judgment, it is observed that 
dismissal of suit of respondent-mortgagee would not debar him 
to file legal proceedings before the appropriate forum under the 
relevant provisions of law.  
 
                                                     
 
 Judge 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
                                             
 
 Judge 
 
G.R.* 
 
 

