Stereo HCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
LAHORE HIGH COURT 
BAHAWALPUR BENCH, BAHAWALPUR 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Civil Revision No.235 of 2016/BWP 
 
 
Province of Punjab through DOR/ADC & others    
 Vs. 
   Firm Friends & Engineers Bahawalpur & others.  
 
JUDGMENT 
 
Date of hearing: 27.03.2024. 
 
Petitioners by: 
Hafiza Mehnaz Nadeem Abbasi, Assistant 
Advocate General alongwith M. Shafique, 
SDO Highway Department.  
 
Respondent by: 
Mr. Irfan Karim ud Din, Advocate. 
 
 
  
 
Shujaat Ali Khan, J: - Unnecessary details apart, the 
facts, as spelt out in this petition, are that contract for 
construction of metalled road from Qaimpur to Baqainwala 
district Bahawalpur was awarded to Firm Friends & Engineers, 
Bahawalpur (hereinafter to be referred as “the respondent-
contractor”) pursuant to letter bearing No.54/W/9121, dated 
16.04.1986, addressed by the Executive Engineer, Highway 
Division, Bahawalpur. Due to issuance of an injunctive order 
by the civil court, the respondent-contractor failed to execute 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--2-- 
the awarded work within the stipulated time, as a result, the 
respondent-contractor applied for extension of time. The 
Superintending 
Engineer, 
Highway 
Circle, 
Bahawalpur, 
acceded to the request of the respondent-contractor for 
extension of time through letter dated 12.09.1987 and it was 
allowed to complete the work till 15.10.1987 subject to 
payment of penalty at the rate ½ per cent of the agreement 
amount. Since the respondent-contractor could not complete the 
assigned work even within the extended period, it applied for 
another extension which was allowed by the Superintending 
Engineer Highway Circle, Bahawalpur vide letter dated 
12.12.1989 and it was permitted to complete the work upto 
30.10.1989 subject to further penalty of 0.5%. As the 
respondent-contractor could not accelerate the pace of work at 
site it was issued repeated notices by the Executive Engineer 
Highway and Sub Divisional Officer to gear up the construction 
work at site. Finally, the Superintending Engineer Highway 
Circle, Bahawalpur on the recommendations of the Executive 
Engineer, Highway Division, Bahawalpur, declared the 
respondent-contractor as defaulter through letter dated 
24.01.1988. In view of differences between the parties, the 
respondent-contractor submitted application before relevant 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--3-- 
authority for settlement of the dispute through arbitration as per 
terms of the agreement whereupon Mr. Muhammad Naeem 
Chughtai was appointed as Arbitrator, who subsequently 
withdrew his name on 16.01.2003. As a result, the respondent-
contractor filed complaint before the Ombudsman, Punjab, 
highlighting maladministration on the part of the departmental 
authorities in respect of release of outstanding dues etc. The 
Ombudsman, Punjab, vide order, dated 22.08.2006, directed the 
departmental authorities to get the matter resolved through 
arbitration whereupon M/s Ch. Muhammad Rafique and Fayyaz 
Ahmad Nangiana, Superintending Engineers (respondents 
No.2 & 3/Arbitrators), were appointed as Arbitrators who 
announced their Award on 08.05.2007 and sent the Award 
alongwith the record to the Chief Engineer (South), Provincial 
Highway Department, Lahore. The respondent-contractor filed 
multiple applications before the Chief Engineer (South), 
Provincial Highway Department, Lahore for provision of copy 
of the Award which was sent to it through letter bearing 
Dispatch No.DA/84, dated 26.06.2007 (Exh.A/4). Upon receipt 
of copy of the Award, the respondent-contractor filed 
application before the learned Senior Civil Judge, Bahawalpur 
for production of the Award alongwith record before the court; 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--4-- 
for modification of the Award and making the same as rule of 
the Court which was marked to the learned Civil Judge, 1st 
Class, Bahawalpur (learned Trial Court) who, through 
judgment and decree, dated 30.11.2012, while making the 
Award as rule of the Court, modified the same to the effect that 
the respondent-contractor would be entitled to recover the 
amount of Award (Rs.2,63,028/-) alongwith 15% interest from 
the year 1989 till payment of the amount. Being aggrieved of 
the judgment & decree passed by the learned Trial Court, the 
petitioners preferred an appeal (bearing No.35 of 2013) before 
the 
learned 
District 
Judge, 
Bahawalpur, 
whereas 
the 
respondent-contractor, instead of challenging the judgment and 
decree of the learned Trial Court through independent appeal, 
filed cross-objections (bearing No.123 of 2013). The learned 
Additional District Judge, Bahawalpur (learned Appellate 
Court) through consolidated judgment & decree, dated 
22.05.2015, while dismissing the appeal of the petitioners 
accepted the cross-objections filed by the respondent-contractor 
and modified the findings of the learned Trial Court to the 
extent that the respondent-contractor would be entitled to 
interest at the rate of 15% per annum on the awarded amount. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--5-- 
Being aggrieved of the decisions of the courts below, the 
petitioners have filed this civil revision petition. 
2. 
The submissions made by the learned Assistant Advocate 
General, representing the petitioners, at bar and those 
encapsulated in the revision petition, are to the effect that the 
Award can only be modified by the Court if the conditions, 
enumerated under Section 15 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (the 
Act, 1940) are fulfilled but in the present case none of the 
conditions postulated under the said provision was attracted, 
thus, the impugned decisions of the courts below are not 
sustainable; that when the respondent-contractor did not file any 
objection against the Award announced by the Arbitrators, he 
could not reopen the matter before the Civil Court through an 
application for making the award as rule of the Court; that since 
the application filed by the respondent-contractor was barred by 
the law of limitation, the same could not be entertained by the 
Civil Court, thus, both the courts below did not appreciate the 
point of limitation in its true perspective; that learned Appellate 
Court did not give its findings on each Issue rather decided the 
matter in a slipshod manner, hence, its decision does not qualify 
the test of a judicial verdict; that without exhausting 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--6-- 
departmental remedies, the respondent-contractor could not 
approach the Civil Court; that since Issues were not properly 
framed, both the courts below did not decide the controversy 
between the parties in its true perspective and that the impugned 
judgments & decrees of the courts below being result of 
misreading and non-reading of evidence are not sustainable. In 
support of her contentions, learned Law Officer, representing 
the petitioners, has relied upon the cases reported as Province of 
the Punjab through Collector District Khushab, Jauharabad 
and others v. Haji Yaqoob Khan and others (2007 SCMR 554), 
Muhammad Ali v. Province of Punjab and others (2005 SCMR 
1302), Muhammad Yousaf and others v. Haji Murad 
Muhammad and others  (PLD 2003 SC 184), Muhammad Afzal 
and others v. Province of Punjab through Collector, Multan 
and others (2001 SCMR 593), Mst. Sughran Bibi and others v. 
Mst. Jameela Begum and others (2001 SCMR 772), Alam Sher 
through Legal Heirs v. Muhammad Sharif and 2 others (1998 
SCMR 458), Bakht Zamin v. Said Sajid (1989 SCMR 1719), 
Aslam and another v. Abdul Sattar (2007 YLR 2472),  
Muhammad Khalid and another v. Muhammad Iqbal and 
another (2005 CLC 970), Ms. Benazir Bhutto v. News 
Publications (Pvt.) Ltd and 4 others (2000 CLC 904), Raza 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--7-- 
Hussain v. Haji Qaisar Iqbal and 7 others (1996 MLD 55),  
Mansab Ali v. Hafizan and 5 others (PLD 1993 Lahore 1) and 
Azizur Rehman v. L.D.A. (1985 CLC 2028). 
3. 
Conversely, learned counsel representing the respondent-
contractor,  while defending the impugned judgments & decrees 
of the courts below, argues that since the department failed to 
clear the outstanding liability of the respondent-contractor, no 
illegality was committed by both the fora below while awarding 
15% interest against the outstanding amount; that when the 
petitioners did not file any objection against the Award 
announced by the Arbitrators, within prescribed period of 
limitation, they have no justification to question the validity of 
the said Award before this Court; that since the respondent-
contractor filed application before Civil Court within prescribed 
period of limitation, the same was within time and the objection 
raised by the learned Law Officer, representing the petitioners, 
is not sustainable. To fortify his contentions, learned counsel 
has relied upon the cases reported as National Highway 
Authority through Chairman, Islamabad v. Messrs Sambu 
Construction Co. Ltd Islamabad and others  (2023 SCMR 
1103), Shahbaz Gul and others v. Muhammad Younas Khan 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--8-- 
and others (2020 SCMR 867),, Safdar Ali Khan v. Azad 
Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir through Chief 
Secretary and 2 others  (2012 CLC 1097),, Messrs Tribal 
Friends Co. v. Province of Balochistan (2002 SCMR 1903), 
National Highway Authority through Director (Legal) v. Lilley 
International (Private) Ltd. and another (2020 CLC 608), 
Nasir Khan v. Zamin Shah and another (2019 CLC 741), 
Messrs DIR Wood Works through proprietor v. Secretary, 
Works and Communication Department Government of NWFP 
and 3 others (2016 YLR 1687), Lahore Development Authority 
through Managing Director, WASA Lahore v. Messrs Faisal 
International Construction Corporation Ltd (2004 CLC 594), 
and Dil Muhammad v. Additional District Judge Sahiwal and 3 
others (1991 MLD 2068).  
4. 
I have heard learned counsel for parties at considerable 
length and have also gone through the documents appended 
with this petition in addition to the case-law cited at the bar. 
5. 
Firstly taking up the point of limitation, I am of the view 
that where notices are issued to the parties by the Arbitrator(s), 
in terms of section 14 of the Act 1940, the period of limitation 
to file Award in the court by the Arbitrator or to move an 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--9-- 
application by any of the parties seeking direction for filing of 
Award in the Court and to make the same as rule of the court, is 
governed under Article 178 of the Limitation Act, 1908. As far 
as the case in hand is concerned, no such notices were issued, 
thus, the period of limitation for the respondent-contractor to 
file the application, subject matter of this petition, was to be 
governed under residuary Article 181 of the Limitation Act, 
1908. Reliance in this regard can be placed on the case reported 
as Inayatullah Khan v. Obaidullah Khan and others (1999 
SCMR 2702) wherein the query, under discussion, has been 
responded in the following manner: - 
“6. Moreover, in view of the special Article 178 of the 
Limitation Act which governs an application for filing in 
Court of an award to be made rule of the Court under the 
Arbitration Act the question of applying the residuary 
Article 181 of the Limitation Act would not arise. In 
Article 178 the period is 90 days from the date of service 
of notice of the making of the award as rule of the Court 
and in the circumstances of this case the said Article 
would apply……” 
Insofar as the case in hand is concerned, both sides are 
unanimous on the point that the Arbitrators announced their 
Award, on 08.05.2007, without issuing notice to the parties in 
terms of section 14 of the Act, 1940. Resultantly, the 
respondent-contractor filed various applications (Exh.A/2, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--10-- 
Exh.A/3 & Exh.A/6) before the departmental authorities for 
provision of copy of the Award which was dispatched to it 
through letter bearing No.DA/84, dated 26.06.2007 (Exh.A/4) 
whereas the respondent-contractor filed application under 
sections 14, 15 and 17 of the Act, 1940 before the learned 
Senior Civil Judge, Bahawalpur on 31.07.2007. In this 
backdrop, the application of the respondent-contractor could not 
be considered as time barred, even if the limitation was to be 
governed under Article 178 ibid thus the findings of the courts 
below on the said point being totally in line with the settled law 
on the subject are immune from interference by this court in 
exercise of its revisional jurisdiction.  
6. 
While addressing the Court, learned Law Officer, 
representing the petitioners, took specific plea that as no 
objections were filed by the respondent-contractor against the 
Award announced by the Arbitrators, he could not move the 
Court for modification of the same. In this regard, I do not see 
eye-to-eye with the learned Law Officer for the reason that 
section 15 of the Act, 1940 empowers the Court to modify an 
Award announced by the Arbitrator(s) while dealing with an 
application filed under the Act, 1940 provided the conditions 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--11-- 
stipulated under the said provision are fulfilled. The said 
question has been dilated upon by Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan in the case of ASCON Engineers (Pvt.) Ltd. v. 
Province of Punjab through Secretary, Housing and Physical 
Planning Department (2002 SCMR 1662) by inter-alia 
observing as under: - 
“6.***** Therefore, we are of the opinion that even if it 
is assumed for the sake of arguments that there was no 
objection but the Court had the authority to correct the 
error by modifying the award. Reference in this behalf 
may be made to the judgment of Messrs Awan Industries 
Limited v. Executive Engineers, Lined Channel Division 
and another (1992 SCMR 65)…….” 
Insofar as the case in hand is concerned, the respondent-
contractor sought modification of the Award to the extent that 
he was entitled for interest from the date when the payment was 
due till its realization, thus, no illegality was committed by both 
the courts below while modifying the findings of the 
Arbitrators, on the point of interest, payable to the respondent-
contractor. 
It is relevant to note that Section 29 of the Act, 1940, 
empowers the Arbitrator to grant interest on Awards which for 
convenience of reference is reproduced herein below: - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--12-- 
“29.Interest on award.—Where and in so far as an 
award is for the payment of money the Court may in the 
decree, order interest, from the date of, the decree at 
such rate as the Court deems reasonable, to be paid on 
the principal sum as adjudged by the award and 
confirmed by the decree.” 
A bare reading of the afore-quoted provision renders it crystal 
clear that the respondent-contractor was entitled for grant of 
interest against the unpaid amount. Further, this question came 
under discussion before the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan 
in the cases of Dawood Cotton Mills Ltd. v. K.F. Development 
Corporation Ltd. (2006 SCMR 1555) and Province of Punjab 
through Secretary, Housing and Physical Planning, Lahore and 
others v. Ilam Din (1998 SCMR 110). In the latter case, the 
Apex Court of the country, while dealing with question relating 
to power of the Court to award interest/mark-up on the decreed 
amount, has inter-alia held as under: - 
“4.***** Learned trial Court, however, proceeded to 
give determination on merits. In the circumstances, the 
learned Judge in the High Court was right in holding 
that the Courts below did not commit any illegality in 
making the award rule of the Court and awarding the 
interest at the rate of 2 per cent, above the bank rate and 
as such no case was made out for interference in 
revisional jurisdiction.” 
 
7. 
Now coming to the plea of learned Law Officer 
representing the petitioners that since the respondent-contractor 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--13-- 
failed to complete the awarded work within the prescribed 
period, he was not entitled to any amount or interest thereon, I 
am of the view that the same does not hold any water for the 
reason that initial period stipulated between the parties, for 
completion of the work, was extended twice upon request of the 
respondent-contractor and it completed the work within the 
extended period except a patch which was subject matter of 
civil litigation, thus, it does not lie in the mouth of the 
petitioners to attribute entire delay to the respondent-contractor 
especially when they themselves extended the period of 
contract, subject to imposition of penalty and admitted that at a 
particular point the work was halted due to issuance of 
injunctive order by the civil court. 
8. 
It has not been denied by the petitioners side that in case 
of any difference between the parties the dispute was to be 
settled through arbitration as per contents of the agreement and 
instead of discharging their liability towards settlement of any 
dispute through arbitration, of their own, the petitioners resorted 
to the said via-media firstly on the written move of the 
respondent-contractor and secondly pursuant to a direction 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--14-- 
issued by the Provincial Ombudsman which speaks volumes 
about sluggishness on their part. 
Even otherwise, both sides being signatories of the 
agreement were bound to honour their commitments and if any 
of them failed to perform its part, the other side could resort to 
arbitration but dilly-dally tactics used by the petitioners to avoid 
resolution of the matter through arbitration stands proof of the 
fact that instead of maintaining their trust amongst the 
contractors, the petitioners prolonged the matter on flimsy 
grounds which ultimately resulted into extra burden on the 
national exchequer in the shape of interest. The said conduct of 
the petitioners becomes more clearer when seen in the light of 
the fact that though the Award, announced by the Arbitrators, 
was made rule of the court through judgment, dated 30.11.2012, 
but till date they have not deposited even a single penny to 
avoid future interest. Such conduct deserves to be deprecated at 
all levels and the officials/officers involved in such slackness 
should be taken to task to make them a precedent for the others.  
9. 
This Court agrees with learned Law Officer that national 
exchequer should be guarded against any attempt by 
unscrupulous person but at the same time government 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--15-- 
authorities are bound to clear any outstanding liability of a 
citizen without any fault and in case they withhold due amount, 
without any justification, they cannot be given any exception on 
the pretext of safeguarding of the national exchequer. At the 
cost of repetition it is observed that petitioners’ stubbornness is 
evident from the fact that they did not bother to deposit even a 
single penny despite making the Award as rule of court by 
learned Trial Court. If the petitioners were so sincere to 
safeguard the national exchequer there was no one impeding 
their way to deposit the amount determined by the Arbitrators 
to avoid any future liability in respect of interest but when they 
failed to perform their duty they have no justification to 
denounce the claim of the respondent-contractor regarding 
interest which has been validated by the two fora below.  
10. 
Now coming to the contention of the learned Law 
Officer, representing the petitioners, that the judgment passed 
by learned Appellate Court offends against clear cut provisions 
of Order XX rule 5 CPC as independent findings have not been 
given on all Issues, I am of the view that in routine if a court 
fails to give its independent findings under each Issue same is 
not sustainable, however, when controversy between the parties 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--16-- 
has been clinched in an exhaustive manner, the decision of a 
court cannot be set aside merely on the ground that independent 
findings on all Issues have not been given. Reliance in this 
regard is placed on the cases reported as Muhammad Iftikhar v. 
Nazakat Ali (2010 SCMR 1868), Muhammad Riaz and others 
v. Mst. Ameer Bivi and others (2008 SCMR 1427) and 
Muhammad Aamir through L.Rs. v. Muhammad Sher (2006 
SCMR 185).  In the last mentioned case, the Apex Court of the 
country, while dealing with the controversy, under discussion, 
has inter-alia observed as under:-  
5.*****It is well-settled by now that a judgment which 
deals with all the points raised, fulfills the requirements 
of law even though it may not have discussed each issue 
separately cannot be termed as "illegal or ab initio void" 
as pressed time and again by the learned Advocate 
Supreme Court on behalf of the petitioner. If any 
reference is required the dictum laid down in Umar Din 
v. Ghazanfer Ali 1991 SCMR 1816 can be referred.” 
If the objection raised by the learned Law Officer, under 
discussion, is considered in the light of afore-quoted judgments 
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan there leaves no doubt 
that learned Appellate Court committed no illegality while 
passing impugned judgment & decree especially when it 
validated the findings of the learned Trial Court and introduced 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--17-- 
modification to the extent that 15% interest against awarded 
amount would be payable annually.  
11. 
Learned Law Officer, representing the petitioners, 
ferociously argued that since the Issues were not framed 
according to pleadings of the parties, dispute between the 
parties was not decided as per law. In this regard, I am of the 
view that court can add or delete an Issue in terms of Order 
XIV CPC, on its own or on the move of any party. It is not the 
case of the petitioners that they ever moved any application 
before learned Trial Court or learned Appellate Court for 
amendment/addition or deletion of any Issue or raised oral 
objection against framing of Issues by learned Trial Court, thus, 
they cannot be allowed to vouch said objection in these 
proceedings. Further, a cursory glance over the Issues framed 
by learned Trial Court brings it to limelight that they are in 
consonance with the pleadings of the parties.  
12. 
Even otherwise, when a party opts to lead evidence and 
gets decision of a matter, without raising any objection against 
framing of Issues by the court of first instance, it cannot be 
allowed to raise such objection at some subsequent stage. 
Reliance in this regard is placed on the cases reported as Najaf 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--18-- 
Iqbal v. Shahzad Rafique (2020 SCMR 1621) and  Muhammad 
Din and others v. Mst. Naimat Bibi and others (2006 SCMR 
586). In the former case the Apex Court of the country while 
dilating upon the consequences of non-raising of objection 
against framing of Issues before the court of first instance, has 
inter-alia observed as under: - 
“6.***** So far as objection of learned counsel for the 
appellant that the proper issues were not framed, we are 
afraid that at this stage when the pleadings of the parties 
were in their knowledge and both the parties have led 
evidence of their own choice in the shape of oral as well 
as documentary, the objection of non-framing of proper 
issues is not relevant at this stage.” 
13. 
Though the petitioners are contesting the matter before 
this Court tooth and nail but continuation of injunctive order, 
issued by the Civil Court, till eruption of dispute between the 
parties speaks volumes about their sluggish attitude. Had the 
petitioners been able to establish that the entire delay was 
attributable to the respondent-contractor, they were well within 
their right to object to the claim of the respondent-contractor 
and withhold a portion of the outstanding amount but when they 
themselves failed to perform their duty towards vacation of stay 
order, issued by the civil court, they were not justified to blame 
the respondent-contractor in that regard. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--19-- 
14. 
It has not been denied by the learned Law Officer, 
appearing on behalf of the petitioners, that the Arbitrators were 
appointed with mutual consent of the parties, thus, without 
establishing that the said Arbitrators misconducted on any point 
the petitioners were bound to honour the Award announced by 
them. Though, learned Law Officer has addressed the Court at 
certain length but has not been able to point out any material 
illegality in the impugned judgments & decrees of the courts 
below justifying interference by this Court in exercise of its 
revisional jurisdiction.  
15. 
While addressing the Court learned Law Officer, 
representing the petitioners, took specific plea that as no 
objections were filed by the respondent-contractor before the 
Arbitrators, its request before the Civil Court for modification 
of the Award was not entertainable. In this regard, I do not find 
myself in agreement with learned counsel for the petitioner for 
the reason that while dealing with an application for making an 
Award as rule of the court, the Court is supposed to consider as 
to whether the request can be acceded to or not notwithstanding 
the fact as to whether any objection was filed by the either side 
or not. In this regard, I stand guided by the judgment of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--20-- 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, reported as A Qutubuddin 
Khan v. CHEC Millwala Dredging Co. (Pvt.) Ltd. (2014 
SCMR 1268) wherein the power of the Court to decide as to 
whether an Award be made rule of the Court or not has inter-
alia held as under: - 
“11. It is settled principle of law that the award of the 
Arbitrator who is chosen judge of facts and of law, 
between the parties, cannot be set aside unless the error 
is apparent on the face of the award or from the award, it 
can be inferred that the Arbitrator has misconducted 
himself under sections 30 and 33 of the Act. However, 
even if no objection under sections 30 and 33 of the Act 
has been filed, the Court at the time of making award 
rule of Court can see that award does not suffer from 
patent illegality.” (emphasis provided) 
 
16. 
As per law laid down by the apex Court of the country in 
the cases of Hajid Wajdad v. Provincial Government through 
Secretary Board of Revenue, Government of Balochistan, 
Quetta and others (2020 SCMR 2046) and Muhammad Idrees 
and others v. Muhammad Pervaiz and others (2010 SCMR 5) 
concurrent findings of facts recorded by the courts below 
cannot be upset by this Court in exercise of its revisional 
jurisdiction in a casual manner until and unless the same are 
proved to be perverse or arbitrary or the same are based on 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--21-- 
misreading or non-reading of evidence which is not the position 
in the case in hand. 
17. 
Now coming to the case-law relied upon by the 
petitioners, I am of the view that the same is inapplicable to the 
facts and circumstances of the present case inasmuch as in the 
case of Province of the Punjab through Collector District 
Khushab, Jauharabad and others (Supra) the Apex Court of the 
country has held that when Appellate Court decides to reverse 
findings of learned Trial Court it is bound to give reasons 
whereas in the instant case learned Appellate Court has 
endorsed the findings of learned Trial Court with minor 
modification that interest would be payable annually. In the 
case of Muhammad Ali (Supra) the question in pith and 
substance revolved around power of the Civil Court to reject 
plaint of a suit which was filed while bypassing the remedies 
before the revenue authorities which is not the position in the 
case in hand. Likewise, in the case of Muhammad Afzal and 
others (Supra) the controversy related to tenancy and grant of 
proprietary rights which has not remotest connectivity with the 
issue involved in this petition. So far as the cases of Mst. 
Sughran Bibi, Bakht Zamin, Muhammad Yousaf and others, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CR No.235 of 2016/BWP. 
 
 
--22-- 
Mansab Ali, Muhammad Khalid and another, Aslam and 
another, Raza Hussain, Ms. Benazir Bhutto and Azizur Rehman 
(Supras) are concerned, in the said cases the Apex Court of the 
country reversed the findings of the fora below on the ground 
that Issues were not properly framed whereas in the instant case 
no such deficiency has been noted by this Court, thus, said 
cases also stand distinguished. Coming to the case of Alam Sher 
through Legal Heirs (Supra), I have observed that the 
proposition in the said case related to jurisdiction of civil court 
to interfere in the order passed by the revenue authorities under 
the Colonization of Government Lands (Punjab) Act, 1912 
which is not the position in the case in hand.  
18. 
For what has been noted above, I see no force in this 
petition which is accordingly dismissed with no orders as to 
costs. 
(Shujaat Ali Khan) 
Judge 
Approved for Reporting. 
  
 
 
 
       
     Judge 
 
Announced in open Court today i.e.   19.04.2024. 
 
 
    Judge 
 
G.R. 

