StereoHCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
 
 
Mst. Rehmat Bibi (through L.Rs.) etc. 
Versus 
Additional District Judge, Gujranwala etc.  
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
Date of hearing: 15.03.2024. 
 
Petitioners by: 
Mr. Irfan Ghaus Ghuman, Advocate. 
 
Respondents by: Mr. Takeel Ahmed Gujjar, Advocate for 
respondent No.3.  
 
 
Shujaat Ali Khan, J: - Unnecessary details apart, 
Muhammad Aslam (respondent No.3) filed a suit for possession 
through pre-emption against Mst. Rehmat Bibi (predecessor-in-
interest of petitioners No.1 to 4), which was partially decreed 
by the learned Civil Judge, Gujranwala through judgment & 
decree, dated 30.09.2000, in view of the compromise between 
the parties. The petitioners, being legal heirs of late Mst. 
Rehmat Bibi, filed application under section 12(2) CPC 
challenging vires of judgment & decree, dated 30.09.2000, on 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--2-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
the basis of fraud and misrepresentation, which was dismissed 
by the learned Civil Judge, Gujranwala (learned Trial Court) 
through order, dated 28.01.2016, against which they filed 
revision petition but without any positive result as the same was 
dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge, Gujranwala 
(learned Appellate Court) vide order, dated 24.03.2017; hence 
this petition. 
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that while 
deciding the matter both the courts below failed to consider that 
Mst. Rehmat Bibi (mother of the petitioners) died on 
20.05.2000 whereas respondent No.3 filed suit on 25.05.2000, 
thus, no decree could be passed in the said suit even on the 
basis of acclaimed statement of mother of the petitioners in 
respect of compromise and that both the courts below omitted 
to consider the contents of the Death Certificate (Exh.A/1) 
pertaining to death of mother of the petitioners which was 
supported by entries in the Register of Deaths, maintained by 
the Secretary Union Council concerned for the period from  
17.06.1995 to 30.12.2014, hence, impugned decisions of the 
courts below are not sustainable. 
3. 
On the other hand, learned counsel representing 
respondent No.3, while defending the impugned decisions of 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--3-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
the courts below, states that mala-fide on the part of the 
petitioners is evident from the fact that initially they filed an 
application for summoning of Secretary Union Council, Kali 
Suba, as witness but subsequently opted to withdraw the same 
seemingly for the reason that the said official was not ready to 
support their stance; that Roshan Din (RW-2), real maternal 
cousin of the petitioners, clarified that Mst. Rehmat Bibi died 
on 19.12.2003, thus, the documents, being relied upon by the 
petitioners, carry no authenticity; that according to Register of 
Revenue Returns (Exh.R/5) maintained by the Nazir, Civil 
Courts, Gujranwala, cheque bearing No.87/3093, worth 
Rs.35,000/- was issued in the name of Mst. Rehmat Bibi which 
was received by her, on 22.11.2000, upon verification by his 
counsel, thus, stance of the petitioners that she died on 
20.05.2000 being contrary to the record cannot be given any 
weightage; that the petitioners being aware of the falsity of their 
claim never made any move for comparison of thumb 
impression of Mst. Rehmat Bibi from Fingerprint Expert 
through the learned Trial Court and that concurrent findings of 
facts recorded by the courts below cannot be upset by this Court 
in exercise of its constitutional jurisdiction vested under Article 
199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--4-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
4. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at 
considerable length and have also gone through the documents, 
annexed with this petition. 
5. 
The moot question involved in this petition is as to 
whether Mst. Rehmat Bibi died on 20.05.2000 or 19.12.2003. 
To believe that Mst. Rehmat Bibi died on 19.12.2003 both the 
courts below have relied upon the Death Certificate issued by 
the Secretary Union Council, Kali Suba and entries in Register 
relating to deaths in the Union Council prepared by the said 
official coupled with statement of RW-2.  
Firstly, taking up the authenticity of Death Certificate 
issued by the Secretary Union Council, Kali Suba, I have 
observed that proper course to prove contents of said document 
was to summon the Secretary, Union Council concerned. 
Though, the petitioners filled application to summon the 
Secretary Union Council, in the shape of additional evidence, 
but subsequently opted to withdraw the same. Consequences of 
reliance upon a death certificate without producing the Nazim 
or the Secretary Union Council concerned has been highlighted 
in the case reported as Muhammad Younas and another v. 
Ghazanfar Abbas and 12 others (2017 YLR 2229)  by inter-
alia observing as under: - 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--5-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
“8.*****The copy of death certificate (Ex.D/3) on its 
face value is to be taken out of consideration for the 
reasons that neither the Secretary, Union Council nor the 
Nazim, who put their signatures on the same, were 
brought into the witness-box to prove the contents of the 
said document. The production of document on record 
and its proof are two independent aspects and the latter 
aspect is vital, which makes a fact to be proved…...” 
If the reliance of the courts below on the death certificate of 
Rehmat Bibi, without examining the Secretary Union Council 
concerned, is seen in the light of the above-quoted judgment, it 
stands crystal clear that both the courts below misdirected 
themselves while relying upon the document, under discussion. 
6. 
Another important limb of the matter in hand is that 
though after withdrawal of the application, filed by the 
petitioners seeking permission to produce the Secretary Union 
Council concerned in the shape of additional evidence, the 
learned Trial Court was vested with the power to summon the 
said official as Court Witness to unveil the truth but non-
exercise of such jurisdiction vested in the Civil Court resulted 
into grave miscarriage of justice. The Apex Court of the 
country in the case reported as Commissioner of Income-Tax, 
Companies Zone-II, Karachi v. Messrs Sindh Engineering 
(Pvt.) Limited, Karachi (2002 SCMR 527) while taking note of 
the non-exercise of powers vested in a forum has inter-alia held 
as under:- 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--6-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
“10.*****Undoubtedly when a Tribunal declines to 
exercise jurisdiction for one or the other pretext then the 
basic question of law emerges for consideration whether 
the decision under challenge is legally justified or not. 
Here we are not confronted with the situation of counting 
the shares of the Government or private persons in the 
respondents organization but our problem is whether 
jurisdiction has been Justifiably exercised by the 
Tribunal and High Court or not. There is no cavil with 
the proposition that non-exercise or mis-exercise of 
jurisdiction by a forum/Tribunal is relatable to the 
question of law. However, the forum/Tribunal seized with 
a proposition is free to form its opinion independently by 
exercising jurisdiction in a prescribed or settled manner. 
As it has been pointed out hereinabove that Income Tax 
Appellate Tribunal had not independently assigned any 
reason in holding that respondent organization was a 
public company because it has based its finding on some 
earlier decision referred to hereinabove and we were not 
aware that what reasons prevailed upon learned 
Tribunal while deciding those cases. Thus in such-like 
situation it was obligatory upon the Tribunal either to 
have disclosed the facts as well as reasons of earlier case 
on which reliance was placed or the respondent's case 
should have been examined independently. As such, we 
are of the opinion that the Income Tax Appellate 
Tribunal did not exercise its jurisdiction in accordance 
with law. Therefore, question of non-exercising of 
jurisdiction properly by the Tribunal, being a question of 
law, was liable to be answered by the High Court in its 
appellate jurisdiction under section 136(2) of the 
Ordinance but it failed to do so.” 
If the conduct of the learned Trial Court as well as that of 
learned Appellate Court is seen in the light of the afore-referred 
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court there leaves no 
ambiguity that both the fora failed to exercise the jurisdiction 
vested in them. 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--7-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
7. 
It is important to observe over here that learned counsel 
representing respondent No.3 took exception against non-
production of the Secretary Union Council by the petitioners to 
prove the contents of the Death Certificate (Exh.A/1). To 
appreciate the plea of respondent No.3, I have gone through the 
contents of the reply, submitted by respondent No.3, to the 
application filed by the petitioners seeking permission to 
produce Secretary Union Council concerned in the shape of 
additional evidence. Relevant portion from the said reply is 
reproduced herein under: - 
ذعرات ادتبایئ 
1۔۔۔۔۔ 
2۔۔۔۔۔ 
3۔۔۔۔ لبق ازںی رکیسرٹی وینین وکلسن عم ررٹسج احرض دعاتل وہا اھت 
 وت وکلسن اسلئ ےن اس یک اہشدت ہن رکایئ
یھت اےئلس دروخاتس اسلئ ہن رصف اناقلب رتف ےہ ہکلب اقلب ارخاج ےہ۔ 
عذ
رات وااعقیت 
1۔۔ 
2
 ۔ہی ہک نمض ربمن2 
 ب د
طلغ اور ےب اینبد ےہ۔ رکیسرٹی وینین وکلسن ہعمب ررٹسج احرض دعاتل وہا اھت۔ اہشدت قلمن 
رکواےن ےئلیک وت وکلسن اسلئ ےن ا س یک اہشدت دنبملق ہن رکوایئ اور ہن یہ ررٹسج کیچ رکواای سج یک وہج ےس اب
 اسلئ وک وکیئ قح احلص ہن ےہ ہک وہ ررٹسج یک وقنالت شیپ رکے۔ ویکہکن وہ ےلہپ یہ داتسوزیی و زابین اہشدت متخ رک
اکچ ےہ
۔ 
 
When confronted with the above portion from the reply of 
respondent No.3, learned counsel representing him failed to 
give even half a reason that as to why his client opposed the 
application of the petitioners for summoning Secretary Union 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--8-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
Council especially when according to his own showing, 
statement of said witness had important bearing upon the final 
outcome of the case. This fact alone is sufficient to establish 
that both the parties did not come forward with true narration of 
facts. Similarly, neither the learned Trial Court nor learned 
Appellate Court exercised the jurisdiction vested in them to 
arrive at a just conclusion. 
8. 
It is relevant to note that though respondent No.3 filed an 
application seeking permission to file list of witnesses but did 
not mention the name of Secretary Union Council concerned in 
the said list. Had respondent No.3 was so fair to unveil the 
truth, there was nobody impeding his way to incorporate the 
name of said official in his application notwithstanding the fact 
as to whether he was summoned by the petitioners or not. The 
said omission on the part of respondent No.3 places him equal 
to the petitioners for non-disclosure of the real facts, in 
particular the date of death of late Mst. Rehmat Bibi, hence, it is 
not open for respondent No.3 to blame the petitioners only for 
suppression of material facts. 
9. 
Insofar as entries of Register relating to deaths in the 
vicinity, prepared by the Secretary Union Council, Kali Suba, is 
concerned, suffice it to note a cursory glance over the said 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--9-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
document leads to indubitable conclusion that certain entries 
therein have been left blank just to accommodate any 
unscrupulous person and possibility of making any entry 
relating to death of Mst. Rehmat Bibi, at some subsequent 
stage, cannot be ruled out. Moreover, against most of the entries 
National Identity Card Number of the informer about death of 
anybody, except that of Chowkidar, has been mentioned but 
against entry relating to death of Mst. Rehmat Bibi though few 
digits of CNIC of Muhammad Rashid (son of Mst. Rehmat 
Bibi), who reported her death to the Secretary Union Council, 
were incorporated but instead of completing the same, they 
were crossed. The said fact prima-facie raises doubts about the 
genuineness of entries in the Death Register and the same could 
only be removed by producing the relevant official viz. the 
Secretary Union Council concerned but failure of both sides to 
produce the said official and inaction on the part of the courts 
below to exercise jurisdiction vested in them left the 
controversy between the parties undecided. 
10. 
Now coming to the reliance of the courts below on the 
statement of Roshan Din (RW-2), I have observed that there is 
no cavil with the fact that he is close relative of the petitioners 
but credibility of said witness stood compromised in view of his 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--10-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
admission that his daughter is married to son of respondent 
No.3 and likewise daughter of respondent No.3 is married to his 
son, thus, it was not safe for the courts below to rely upon the 
statement of said witness especially when said statement was 
not corroborated by any document and he fell within the 
category of interested witness. The Apex Court of the country 
in the matter of Mst. Saadia v. Mst. Gul Bibi (2016 SCMR 662) 
while noting down the ramifications of withholding of related 
witnesses and reliance on the statements of interested witnesses, 
has inter-alia held as under:-   
“11. Beside, the evidence of these three witnesses the 
evidence of other two witnesses i.e. PW-4 Gul 
Bibi/respondent and PW-5 Shah Nadir further reveal that 
they were interested witnesses installed for the purpose 
of justifying the execution and genuineness of the two 
documents i.e. Ex-PW1/1 and PW1/2. However, they also 
failed as their evidence was not confidence inspiring 
enough to prove the execution of these two documents. 
Similarly the evidence of Hand Writing Expert was of no 
avail as all the documents sent to him; firstly, came from 
the possession of the respondent; secondly, the 
comparison of Photostat copies with the originals was 
not warranted by law; and lastly such exercise was not a 
conclusive proof about the genuineness of Ex-PW1/1. 
We, therefore, find much force in the arguments of the 
learned ASC for the appellant that concurrent findings of 
the three Courts below suffered from misreading and 
non-reading of evidence, which resulted in miscarriage 
of justice to the appellant, thus open to interference.”  
11. 
It is very strange to note that the courts below based their 
findings on the testimony of Roshan Din (RW-2) despite 
knowing the fact that he had an axe to grind against the interest 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--11-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
of the petitioners on account of his close relationship with 
respondent No.3 and his statement was not corroborated by any 
documentary evidence. It is well-settled by now that 
documentary evidence outweighs the oral evidence. Reliance in 
this regard can be placed on the case of Tassaduq Hussain Shah 
and others v. Allah Ditta Shah and others (2023 SCMR 1635) 
wherein the Apex Court of the country, while comparing the 
inter-se worth and value of documentary and oral evidence, has 
inter-alia concluded as under:- 
“12.*****There is nothing on the record to show that the 
stance of Allah Ditta was challenged through evidence in 
rebuttal. It is settled law that documentary evidence takes 
precedence over oral evidence……” 
If the veracity of the statement of Roshan Din (RW-2) is 
considered on the touchstone of the afore-referred judgment of 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court it stands clarified that it was not 
safe for the courts below to hinge upon the testimony of said 
witness when the same was not corroborated by the relevant 
documentary evidence. 
12. 
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.3 
put much emphasis on the fact that as Mst. Rehmat Bibi 
received cheque in the sum of Rs.35,000/- from the Nazir, Civil 
Courts, Gujranwala for withdrawal of the amount deposited by 
respondent No.3 during pendency of his suit for possession 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--12-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
through pre-emption as Zar-e-Soim the plea of the petitioners 
that she died on 20.5.2000 does not hold any substance. The 
said assertion of learned counsel for respondent No.3 cannot be 
given much importance for the reason that though respondent 
No.3 mentioned the name of Civil Nazir at Sr.No.3 in para 5 of 
his application seeking permission to place on record list of 
witnesses but did not produce the said official in the witness 
box despite the fact that some of the persons, referred in above 
para of application, under discussion, were produced. Though 
learned counsel for respondent No.3 has blamed the petitioners 
for non-production of Secretary, Union Council concerned but 
has not come forward with any plausible explanation as to why 
Civil Nazir was not produced in evidence despite the fact that 
his name was duly mentioned in the application filed by 
respondent No.3 seeking permission to place on record List of 
Witnesses. The august Supreme Court in the case of Mst. 
Zarsheda v. Nobat Khan (PLD 2022 SC 21) while dealing with 
the repercussions of withholding of an important witness by a 
party during the course of evidence has inter-alia held as 
under:- 
“9.*****Adverse 
inference 
for non-production of 
evidence is one of the strongest presumptions known to 
law and the law allows it against the party who withholds 
the evidence……”  

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--13-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
In case, the conduct of the parties in the present matter is seen 
in the light of the afore-quoted judgment of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court, it stands proved that if the courts below were 
justified to form opinion against the petitioners for non-
production of the Secretary Union Council concerned they were 
supposed to justify the conduct of respondent No.3 for non-
examining of the Civil Nazir especially when his statement had 
important bearing to ascertain as to whether the lady, who 
received cheque from him, was Rehmat Bibi or not but 
omission of such import limb on the part of the courts below 
affirms that controversy between the parties was not decided in 
an impartial manner.  
13. 
In order to appreciate the contention of learned counsel 
for respondent No.3 that Mst. Rehmat Bibi received cheque 
from the Civil Nazir, Gujranwala, on 22.11.2000, I have 
summoned original Register of Revenue Returns maintained by 
the Civil Nazir, Gujranwala, according to which afore-referred 
cheque was received by one Mst. Rehmat Bibi upon her 
identification by her counsel, namely, Tayyab Tahir Advocate 
(RW-4). Reliance upon the identification of Mst. Rehmat Bibi 
by said witness was unjustified for the reason that during cross-
examination said witness showed his inability to clarify that as 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--14-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
to when Rehmat Bibi came to him and who accompanied her at 
the relevant time. He further showed his lack of knowledge 
about the person who facilitated compromise between the 
parties. Moreover, lack of knowledge of said witness about the 
name of the Judge, who recorded the statement of Rehmat Bibi, 
acknowledging compromise, raises serious doubts about the 
authenticity of his statement. In this scenario, reliance of the 
courts below upon the statement of said witness connotes to 
lack of legal acumen on their part. 
14. 
Since both sides did not come up with true narration of 
fact, coupled with the fact that intricate question relating to the 
death of Rehmat Bibi was involved in the matter, both the 
courts below were supposed to follow the principle of sifting 
grain from the chaff to arrive at a just conclusion about date of 
death of Mst. Rehmat Bibi which had important bearing on the 
outcome of the case but both the courts below, instead of 
unveiling the truth, proceeded to rely upon the documents 
contents whereof were not proved as per law. It is well 
established by now that contents of a document, in particular a 
public document, can be proved by producing its custodian in 
due course.  

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--15-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
15. 
Another important facet of the instant matter is that on 
the one hand stance of respondent No.3 is that Mst. Rehmat 
Bibi died on 19.12.2003 but on the other he produced copy of 
Register (Exh.R/10) relating to deaths prepared by the Secretary 
Union Council, on the basis of information furnished by relative 
of the deceased(s) or Chowkidar of the village, wherein date of 
death of Mst. Rehmat Bibi has been mentioned as 20.05.2000. 
In such situation, both the courts below were bound to take pain 
to unearth the real date of death of Mst. Rehmat Bibi as it was 
the sole decisive factor for decision of lis between the parties. 
16. 
While scanning the decisions of the courts below, I have 
observed that they have given much importance to the 
statement of Mr. Manzoor Hussain, Advocate (RW-3) despite 
the fact that the said witness during cross-examination showed 
his inability to state that who was accompanying Mst. Rehmat 
Bibi when she approached him to hire his legal services. The 
said fact leads to irresistible conclusion that late Mst. Rehmat 
Bibi had no independent advice from any male member from 
her family either at the time of engaging Mr. Manzoor Hussain, 
Advocate (RW-3) as her counsel, or at the time of making 
statement 
before 
learned 
Trial 
Court 
acknowledging 
compromising with respondent No.3. The Hon’ble Supreme 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--16-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
Court of Pakistan in the case reported as Ch. Muneer Hussain v. 
Mst. Wazeeran Mai alias Mst. Wazir Mai (PLD 2005 SC 658) 
while taking serious note of the casual approach of the courts 
while adjudging the execution of any document by a female, 
without independent advice from a male family member, has 
inter-alia observed as under:- 
“It has not been established through evidence that the 
above-said documents were executed by her or that they 
were executed by her voluntarily out of her own free-will 
and that at the time of execution of said documents she 
had an independent advice of her close male relatives 
and that the contents of the said documents were read 
over to her and nature of the transaction was explained 
to her. The bare perusal of the said documents shows that 
in this regard, the needful was not done. The onus was on 
the appellant and he miserably failed to discharge the 
same. The learned counsel for the appellant has not been 
able to point out any non-reading of evidence or 
illegality, in the impugned judgment. We are of the view, 
that the High Court has drawn correct conclusions from 
facts found and we are not inclined to interfere merely 
because the learned counsel for the appellant is of the 
view that another inference is also possible. The 
respondent is being continuously victimized and is out of 
possession of her landed property measuring about 50 
acres, inherited by her from her father, for the last 26 
years and is suffering because the appellant thought that 
since she is a helpless female, he can grab her property.” 
17. 
 While relying upon the testimony of Mr. Manzoor 
Hussain (RW-3) both the courts below omitted to note that the 
said witness showed his lack of knowledge about the person, 
who presented Wakalatnama before the court on his behalf. 
Moreover, the said witness admitted that he was not aware as to 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--17-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
whether written statement was filed in the suit and as to 
whether it was part of judicial file or not. Furthermore, the said 
witness stated that he did not remember who facilitated 
recording of statements of parties before the Court as a result of 
compromise. The said witness further admitted that he was not 
aware about the fact that the woman, who appeared to make 
statement in lieu of compromise, possessed her National 
Identity Card, having picture of Mst. Rehmat Bibi. The conduct 
of the said witness became doubtful when during later part of 
his cross-examination, the said witness, with a view to improve 
case of the respondents, stated that the written statement was 
not filed due to compromise between the parties without 
divulging that as to how he came to know about any future 
compromise between the parties especially when respondent 
No.3 was hotly pursuing his suit and the learned Trial Court had 
been adjourning the case for filing of Written Statement. In 
ordinary circumstances, the statement of a member of the Bar 
vouching a fact is given due credence but when such statement 
does not clinch the real controversy between the parties rather 
seems to be partial, same cannot be given precedence over the 
documentary evidence. Reference in this regard can be made to 
the case of Mst. Safia Begum v. Muhammad Ajmal (2007 YLR 
3030) wherein it has inter-alia been held as under:- 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--18-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
“4. The agreement has not been proved through 
production of two marginal witnesses as required under 
Article 17 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order 1984. Haji Inayat 
Ullah is the sole witness in support of agreement, who is 
father of the plaintiff. Ghulam Nabi son of Chiragh Din is 
step-brother of Mst. Safia Bibi. He did not enter in the 
witness box. Muhammad Younis Mughal, P.W.3 is not the 
attesting witness. He only authored the document and 
read over its contents to the parties and candidly 
admitted that Mst. Safia Bibi was not personally known 
to him. He required her to bring male member of family 
which shows his mind of non availability of independent 
advice to appellant. He cannot be treated at par with the 
petition writer, who maintains a register with page 
marking and entries are carried with serial No. and date. 
An Advocate is not obliged to keep record. He had not 
produced his register for examination in Court. His 
statement, thus, is of no evidentiary value. Reference can 
be had to Altaf Hussain Shah v. Nazar Hussain Shah 
(2001 YLR 1967) and Qasim Ali v. Khadim Hussain 
(PLD 2005 Lah. 654)” 
If the authenticity of statement of Mr. Manzoor Hussain, 
Advocate (RW-3) is adjudged in the light of the afore-referred 
judgment there leaves no ambiguity that it was not safe for the 
courts below to rely upon the same while determining the fact 
that as to whether Mst. Rehmat Bibi was alive at the time of 
filing of suit by respondent No.3 and she appeared before the 
court owning compromised between the parties. 
18. 
Now taking up the question relating to the credibility of 
the statement of Mr. Tayyab Tahir, Advocate (RW-4), I have 
noted that according to Manzoor Hussain (RW-3) statements of 
the parties relating to compromise were facilitated by RW-4. 
While replying to a question as to name of the Presiding Officer 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--19-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
who recorded the statements of the parties, RW-4 showed his 
inability to tell the name of the Presiding Officer, who recorded 
statement of the parties relating to compromise. Moreover, the 
said witness also stated that he did not remember as to whether 
there was picture of Mst. Rehmat Bibi on the National Identity 
Card presented at the time of making statement before the 
learned Trial Court or not. In this scenario, reliance of the 
courts below on the statements of RW-3 & RW-4 to believe 
that at the time of compromise Mst. Rehmat Bibi was alive, is 
not justified. 
19. 
It is not out of place to mention over here that none of the 
parties came forwarded with true picture and in such scenario 
responsibility of the courts to arrive at a just conclusion 
increased manifold. Further, not only death of Mst. Rehmat 
Bibi was reported to the Secretary Union Council, Kali Suba, 
by Muhammad Rasheed (petitioner No.2) but also mutation of 
inheritance bearing No.991 was attested on 31.12.2009 on the 
basis of his statement but the said person did not enter the 
witness box despite the fact that according to his own statement 
(referred in Mutation No.991 Supra) Mst. Rehmat Bibi died 
about six years prior to attestation of said mutation which 
approximately comes to year 2003. In the given circumstances, 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--20-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
both the courts below failed to clinch the issue between the 
parties in its true perspective. 
20. 
While going through the evidence of the parties, I have 
observed that Muhammad Naseer 
(AW-1) 
and Noor 
Muhammad (AW-2) disclosed the name of the person who led 
the funeral prayer of Mst. Rehmat Bibi but non-summoning of 
said person by the learned Trial Court, to reach a just 
conclusion, shows that both the court failed to exercise the 
jurisdiction vested in them. Had the statement of said person 
been recorded, it was very easy for learned Trial Court to arrive 
at just decision. 
21. 
In ordinary 
circumstances, 
documentary 
evidence 
outweighs the oral evidence but it is exceptional case wherein 
documentary evidence cannot be relied upon without due 
corroboration to believe that Mst. Rehmat Bibi was alive at the 
time of making statement before learned Trial Court owning 
compromise between the parties as entries in documents, 
referred supra, contradicted each other. In this backdrop, I think 
it appropriate to remit the matter back to learned Trial Court for 
decision afresh. 
22. 
For what has been discussed above, instant petition is 
accepted and impugned decisions, rendered by the courts 

 
 
 
W.P. No. 31166 of 2017. 
--21-- 
(Mst. Rehmat Bibi through L.Rs v. Additional District Judge etc.       
 
 
below, are set-aside. As a result, the application filed by the 
petitioners, under section 12(2) CPC, would be deemed to be 
pending which shall be decided by the learned Trial Court 
afresh. During post remand proceedings learned Trial Court 
would be at liberty to summon anybody whose statement, in its 
opinion, would further the ends of justice. 
23. 
The Office is directed to return the original Register of 
Revenue Returns, requisitioned from the Nazir Civil Courts, 
Gujranwala, forthwith. 
Judge 
 
 
Announced in open Court today i.e. 02.04.2024. 
Approved for Reporting. 
 
Judge 
G.R.* 

