Stereo. H C J D A-38. 
JUDGMENT SHEET 
IN THE PUNJAB SUBORDINATE JUDICIARY 
SERVICE TRIBUNAL LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
Service Appeal No.06 of 2017 
 
 
Zafar Hussain Bhatti 
Versus 
Lahore High Court, Lahore through its Registrar 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Date of hearing:     24.04.2024. 
Appellant by: 
Ms. Sabahat Rizvi, Advocate along 
 
with appellant. 
 
Respondent by: 
Mr. 
Manzoor 
Hussain 
Dogar, 
 
Advocate. 
  
MUHAMMAD SAJID MEHMOOD SETHI, J./CHAIRMAN:-
Through instant appeal, appellant has assailed orders dated 
03.05.2017 and 19.05.2017, passed by respondent, whereby 
appellant’s request for grant of proforma promotion as District 
& Sessions Judge was declined. 
2.  
Brief facts are that appellant was served with show cause 
notice dated 29.05.2013 with the allegation that he while posted 
as Additional District & Sessions Judge, Pattoki, vide order 
dated 15.08.2012 granted post arrest bail to accused in case FIR 
No.57 dated 16.02.2012, registered under section 9-C of the 
Control of Narcotics Substance Act, 1997 (the “CNSA”) at 
Police Station, City Phool Nagar, District Kasur, for having 
been found in possession of 15-1/2 kilograms Charas, which 
was against the provisions of section 51 of the CNSA, which 
was an order passed beyond jurisdiction and amounted to 
inefficiency and misconduct within the contemplation of Rule 
6(3) of the Punjab Civil Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) 
Rules, 1999. As a result, minor penalty of withholding 
promotion for a period of three years with effect from 2012 was 
imposed vide Notification dated 27.09.2016. Feeling aggrieved, 

 
Service Appeal No.06 of 2017 
2
appellant filed review petition for setting aside the afore-said 
Notification and grant of proforma promotion, which was 
declined vide orders / letters dated 03.05.2017 & 19.05.2017. 
Hence, instant appeal.  
3. 
Learned counsel for appellant submits that appellant’s 
promotion was approved by the Hon’ble Chief Justice and 
Judges w.e.f. 06.08.2012 on the recommendations of the 
Provincial Judicial Selection Board, therefore, subsequent show 
cause notice dated 29.05.2013 cannot operate retrospectively as 
to impair appellant’s legitimate right. He adds that grant of bail 
is a judicial function and a routine matter, therefore, 
disciplinary proceedings could not have been initiated. He 
contends that appellant’s promotion was a regular promotion 
under section 2(2) of the Punjab Civil Servants Act, 1974 and 
not on officiating basis under Rule 13(i) of the Punjab Civil 
Servants (Appointment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1974. 
He argues that there was inordinate delay of almost three and 
half years in conclusion of disciplinary proceedings, which is 
not a bar to consider appellant for promotion. He further 
submits that major penalty of withholding promotion could not 
have been imposed without holding regular inquiry. He 
contends that allegation of inefficiency is vague and is not 
supported by any material rather appellant earned good PERs 
throughout his career. In the end, he submits that appellant has 
been victimized for no fault of his own, therefore, he is entitled 
for grant of proforma promotion under the law. He has relied 
upon Secretary Kashmir Affairs and Northern Areas Division, 
Islamabad v. Saeed Akhtar and another (PLD 2008 Supreme 
Court 392),  
4. 
Conversely, learned counsel for respondent submits that 
appellant along with others was promoted on officiating basis, 
with direction to remain on probation period of one year 
extendable to further 02 years, thus, question of retrospective 
effect of the penalty does not arise because promotion could be 
withheld from the date when it fell due. He contends that a 

 
Service Appeal No.06 of 2017 
3
glaring instance of inefficiency emerged from judicial record, 
therefore, regular inquiry was dispensed with, however all legal 
and codal formalities were observed, proper show cause notice 
was issued and opportunity of personal hearing was also 
afforded to appellant.  
5. 
Arguments heard. Available record perused.  
6. 
Perusal of record shows that appellant was promoted as 
District and Sessions Judge (BS-21), on the recommendations 
of the Provincial Judicial Selection Board, vide Notification 
dated 06.08.2012, however subsequently, Vide Notification 
dated 27.09.2016, appellant’s promotion was ordered to be 
withheld from the year 2012 for a period of three years, 
retrospectively, overlooking the fact that promotion already 
stood notified by the competent authority which was neither 
rescinded nor recalled. It is not the case of respondent that 
appellant was short of eligibility criteria for the promotion and 
admittedly, recommendations of a duly convened Provincial 
Judicial Selection Board were in favour of appellant. In these 
circumstances, subsequent events including allegations of 
inefficiency and misconduct on passing a bail order or pending 
inquiries would become irrelevant once a promotion has been 
made after fulfillment of all legal and procedural requirements. 
These matters may possibly be taken into consideration while 
processing case for further promotion. Reference can be made 
to Secretary to Government of the Punjab, Communication & 
Works Department, Lahore and others v. Muhammad Khalid 
Usmani & others (2016 SCMR 2125 = NLR 2016 Service 
117). 
 
Furthermore, a valid promotion order had already been 
passed in appellant’s favour, which created certain rights in his 
favour. We are of the considered opinion that power of receding 
an order is available with the authority before taking a decisive 
step. The purpose behind such power is to retrace the wrong 
steps taken by the authority, with the exception that where the 
order has taken legal effect, and in pursuance thereof certain 

 
Service Appeal No.06 of 2017 
4
rights have been created in favour of an individual, such an 
order cannot be withdrawn or rescinded to the detriment of his / 
her rights. The principle of animus revertendi or locus 
poenitentiae demand that when an order is acted upon and 
certain benefits have accrued to the person concerned under the 
order, the same cannot be withdrawn with retrospective effect to 
deprive that person of the accrued rights. Reference can be 
made to Pakistan through the Secretary, Ministry of Finance v. 
Muhammad Himayatullah Farukhi (PLD 1969 SC 407), 
Capital Development Authority Through Chairman, Islamabad 
And Others v. Shabir Hussain And Others (2022 SCMR 627) 
and Mrs. Zeenat Parveen Jaffery versus Secretary to 
Government of Sind, Education Department and 4 others [1983 
P L C (C.S.) 1260].  
7. 
It is well-settled that penalty cannot be imposed 
retrospectively unless the authority is vested with such powers 
expressly provided under the applicable law / rules. No such 
provision has been cited by learned counsel for respondent to 
defend the impugned action. A passing reference to some 
precedents will not be out of place where the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan elaborated the principle of awarding major penalty 
retrospectively, including the cases reported as Noor 
Muhammad v. The Member Election Commission, Punjab and 
others (1985 SCMR 1178) and Syed Sikandar Ali Shah v. 
Auditor-General of Pakistan and others (2002 SCMR 1124), 
wherein it has categorically been declared that major penalty 
could not have been imposed with retrospective effect unless 
the competent authority was expressly empowered in this regard 
by some statute or rules made thereunder.  
8. 
We note that show cause notice was issued on 
29.05.2013, appellant furnished reply on 06.06.2013 and 
personal hearing was afforded on 08.06.2013 (as per stance of 
appellant), however the proceedings were concluded by issuing 
Notification dated 27.09.2016 i.e. after lapse of more than three 
years from personal hearing. No justification and sufficient 

 
Service Appeal No.06 of 2017 
5
reasons have been advanced by respondent for the delay in 
concluding the proceedings, especially when regular inquiry 
was dispensed with on the ground that judicial order was 
sufficient to show the inefficiency and misconduct. We observe 
that pendency of disciplinary proceedings was also a 
punishment and appellant had suffered such agony and mental 
torture for such a long period. Reference can be made to Raja 
Muhammad Shafique Javaid v. Lahore High Court through 
Registrar [2005 PLC (C.S.) 1015]. 
9. 
Needless to say that a judicial officer while hearing a 
case is at liberty to decide the same by applying law on the facts 
thereof based on the available record. A decision passed by any 
judge may ultimately turn out to be wrong and be set aside by 
higher judicial forum. The erroneous exercise of judicial power 
resulting into passing of an order on the basis of incorrect 
application of law, however cannot and should not cast doubt 
on the integrity of the judicial officer. The quality of a judgment 
/ order passed by a judicial officer can only be judged in 
appellate judicial proceedings and ordinarily not through 
disciplinary proceedings unless the extraneous considerations 
for which a judgment / order was passed are proved through 
cogent material brought before the inquiry officer. The inquiry 
officer / hearing officer while conducting disciplinary 
proceedings cannot act as the appellate / revisional forum over 
the judgments / order passed by the judicial officer. The judicial 
independence of subordinate judiciary is required to be 
observed and respected at all cost and the inquiry 
officer/hearing officer must tread extremely cautiously in such 
matters otherwise it would put a chilling effect on the working 
of the subordinate judiciary in performing their judicial 
functions freely and fairly. Reference can be made to Ishwar 
Chand Jain v. High Court of Punjab & Haryana (AIR 1988 SC 
1395) and K.P. Tiwari v. State of Madhya Pradesh (AIR 1994 
SC 1031). The observation of the Indian Supreme Court, in 
latter case, are as under:- 

 
Service Appeal No.06 of 2017 
6
“4 …. The higher courts every day come across orders of 
the lower courts which are not justified either in law or in fact 
and modify them or set them aside. That is one of the 
functions of the superior Courts. Our legal system 
acknowledges the fallibility of the judges and hence provides 
for appeals and revisions. A judge tries to discharge his 
duties to the best of his capacity. While doing so, 
sometimes, he is likely to error. It is well said that a judge 
who has not committed an error is yet to be born. And that 
applies to judges at all levels from the lowest to the highest. 
Sometimes, the difference in views of the higher and the 
lower courts is purely a result of a difference in approach 
and perception. On such occasions, the lower courts are not 
necessarily wrong and the higher courts always right. It has 
also to be remembered that the lower judicial officers mostly 
work under a charged atmosphere and are constantly under 
a psychological pressure with all the contestants and their 
lawyers almost breathing down their necks more correctly up 
to their nostrils. They do not have the benefit of a detached 
atmosphere of the higher courts to think coolly and decide 
patiently. Every error, however gross it may look, should not, 
therefore, be attributed to improper motive…” 
 
 
In a judgment reported as Rao Abdul Jabbar Khan v. 
Registrar, Lahore High Court, Lahore [2016 PLC (C.S.) 281], 
this Court held that in the absence of any evidence it will not be 
fair to suggest that bail cancellation order passed by the judicial 
officer was based on malice and that malice cannot be presumed 
on the basis of surmises and conjectures. 
 
10.  
In the present case, there is no supporting material to 
establish any extraneous considerations on the part of the 
appellant to have passed the order which was the subject matter 
of the inquiry. The impugned order was passed on the 
allegations of inefficiency and misconduct but no efforts were 
made to substantiate these allegations by way of a detailed 
inquiry, especially in view of stance of appellant that he secured 
outstanding PERs throughout his service career and received no 
adverse remarks of misconduct or being inefficient. To our 
mind, the allegations of inefficiency and misconduct are also 
not proved, hence, impugned orders are unsustainable in the eye 
of law.  
 
11. 
Learned counsel for respondent argued that appellant was 
promoted on officiating basis subject to assumption of charge of 
the post and was placed under probation and impugned order 

 
Service Appeal No.06 of 2017 
7
was passed before assumption of charge and during probation 
period, thus, question of retrospective punishment does not 
arise. Suffice it to say that as the order of imposition of penalty 
is not a valid order in view of judgments of the superior Courts 
and our afore-referred observations, therefore, there remains no 
justification to give different treatment to appellant from his ten 
other colleagues, especially when some of them were given 
posting immediately after issuance of the promotion order. 
Needless to say that the promotion was made as per eligibility 
criteria against the substantive posts after fulfillment of all legal 
requirements and same was also not rescinded at any 
subsequent stage. Even otherwise, the issue has been settled by 
the Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of Muhammad 
Khalid Usmani supra. The operative part of the observations is 
reproduced hereunder:- 
 
14. 
It is clear and obvious from a perusal of Rule 13(i) 
ibid that an appointment by promotion 'on officiating basis' 
can be made against posts which fall vacant as a result of 
the circumstances mentioned in the said Rule. We have 
specifically asked the learned Law Officer if the posts 
against which the respondents were promoted had fallen 
vacant as a result of any of the situations mentioned in rule 
13(i) of the Rules. He has frankly conceded that this was not 
the case, and that the respondents were promoted against 
regular vacancies which had been available in the ordinary 
course of events. It is also evident from the record that the 
respondents possessed the qualification and experience 
required for promotion from the post of Assistant Engineers 
to Executive Engineers. In this context, reference may be 
usefully made to Jafar Ali Akhtar Yousafzai v. Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan (PLD 1970 Quetta 115) 
 
…. 
 
21. 
During hearing of these appeals, we have noted with 
concern that the device of officiating promotion, ad hoc 
promotion/appointment or temporary appointment etc. is 
used by Government Departments to keep civil servants 
under their influence by hanging the proverbial sword of 
Damocles over their heads (of promotion 'on officiating basis' 
liable to reversion). This is a constant source of insecurity, 
uncertainty and anxiety for the concerned civil servants for 
motives which are all too obvious. Such practices must be 
seriously discouraged and stopped in the interest of 
transparency, certainty and predictability, which are 
hallmarks of a system of good governance. As observed in 
Zahid Akhtar v. Government of Punjab (PLD 1995 SC 530) 
"a tamed subservient bureaucracy can neither be helpful to 

 
Service Appeal No.06 of 2017 
8
the Government nor it is expected to inspire public 
confidence in the administration". 
…. 
23. 
We are of the view that promotion on an officiating 
basis should be resorted to only in the circumstances 
visualized in rule 13(i) of the Rules. Further, the spirit of such 
action, a purely temporary and stopgap arrangement for a 
limited period, should be kept in mind. In no circumstance 
should such a stopgap arrangement be allowed to continue 
for years on end. On our query, we have been informed that 
the usual period of probation provided by the law for regular 
posts by way of direct appointments is a maximum of two 
years. It would, therefore, be just and fair if the said 
timeframe is followed in case of promotion on officiating 
basis also, unless there are extraordinary circumstances 
necessitating extension of such period further for a limited 
duration, and such extraordinary circumstances must be 
reduced in writing by the competent authority directing such 
extension. We may, however, emphasize that such 
extensions cannot be undertaken in a routine and 
thoughtless manner and can only be made where 
circumstances spelt out in rule 13 ibid are in existence. In 
addition, if the law provides a specified period of probation 
for appointments against regular posts, we do not see any 
reason why a free hand should be given to Government 
Departments to undertake promotions on officiating basis for 
unlimited and unspecified periods.” 
12. 
For the foregoing reasons, instant appeal is allowed and 
orders qua imposing penalty of withholding promotion for a 
period of three years with effect from 2012 and declining 
appellant’s request for grant of proforma promotion are set 
aside. Appellant is entitled to the grant of proforma promotion 
and consequent monetary benefits as per law. 
 
(Muhammad Sajid Mehmood Sethi) 
Chairman 
 
 
(Abid Husain Chattha)   
 
(Rasaal Hasan Syed) 
 Member          
 
    
 
Member 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
  Chairman 
 
*Sultan*    

