StereoHCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Writ Petition No.4265 of 2020. 
 
 
Irfan Mohsin    
Versus 
 Additional District and Sessions Judge & others   
 
JUDGMENT 
 
Date of hearing: 06.03.2024 & 12.03.2024. 
 
Petitioner by: 
Mr. Ghulam Abbas, Advocate. 
 
Respondents by: Mian Qamar Zaman Mahaar, Advocate.  
 
  
 
Shujaat Ali Khan, J: - Through this single judgment, I 
intend to decide W.P. No. 4265 of 2020 (this petition) as well 
as W.P. No. 12666 of 2020 (connected petition) having 
commonality of law and facts.  
2. 
Unnecessary details apart, the facts as gleaned out from 
these petitions are that Mst. Naeem Fatima (hereinafter to be 
referred as respondent No.1) and Mst. Qurat Ul Ain Fatima 
(hereinafter to be referred as the minor) filed a composite 
suit for recovery of their maintenance; recovery of dower 
amount worth Rs.100,000/- as per entry against column No.14 
of Nikah Nama; recovery of Rs.100,000/- as per condition 
stipulated against column No.19 of Nikah Nama; recovery of 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--2-- 
dowry articles worth Rs.200,000/- as per column No.16 of 
Nikah Nama and delivery charges of the minor worth 
Rs.50,000/-, against Irfan Mohsin (hereinafter to be referred 
as the petitioner). The learned Judge Family Court, Depalpur 
(learned trial Court) vide judgment and decree, dated 
17.05.2019, while dismissing the claim of respondent No.1 for 
recovery of delivery charges as well as her maintenance, 
declared her entitled to recover dower amount of Rs.100,000/- 
in addition to Rs.100,000/- in terms of condition mentioned 
against column No.19 of Nikah Nama and Rs.150,000/- as price 
of dowry articles. Further, the minor was held entitled to 
recover maintenance at the rate of Rs.8,000/- per month from 
the date of institution of suit till her legal entitlement with 10% 
annual increase. Aggrieved of the judgment and decree of 
learned trial Court, the petitioner filed an appeal and the learned 
Additional District Judge, Depalpur (learned appellate Court) 
vide judgment and decree, dated 02.11.2019, while reversing 
the findings of learned trial Court to the extent of recovery of 
Rs.100,000/- as per condition mentioned against column No.19 
of Nikah Nama, reduced the quantum of maintenance of the 
minor from Rs.8,000/- to Rs.6,000/- per month and upheld rest 
of the findings of learned trial Court. Aggrieved of judgments 
and decrees of learned trial Court as well as learned appellate 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--3-- 
Court the petitioner has filed this petition whereas through the 
connected petition, respondent No.1 has assailed the vires of 
judgment & decree of learned appellate Court.  
3. 
The submissions made by Mr. Ghulam Abbas, Advocate, 
representing the petitioner, can be summed up in the words that 
since it was second marriage of respondent No.1 with the 
petitioner, no dowry articles were given at the time of her 
marriage; that though in her plaint, respondent No.1 averred 
that her father, being an agriculturist, was enjoying sound 
financial position at the time of her marriage but she did not 
produce any document in that regard, thus, her stance remained 
unproved; that credibility of the witnesses, produced by 
respondent No.1, stands shattered from the fact that they 
claimed that at the time of marriage respondent No.1 was  
bachelor but as a matter of fact she was divorcee; that since the 
couple did not shift to the house of the petitioner rather they 
celebrated first night of their wedding in the house of paternal 
uncle of the petitioner, no dowry articles were given to 
respondent No.1 at the time of her marriage; that both the 
Courts below have relied upon the entries against column No.16 
of Nikah Nama to believe that the dowry articles were given to 
respondent No.1 but said column is meant for anything which is 
given in the shape of land etc. in lieu of dower in addition to 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--4-- 
cash, hence contents of said column were erroneously relied 
upon by the courts below; that as a matter of fact at the time of 
marriage, all columns of Nikah Nama were not filled in rather 
the Nikah Khawan/Registrar got signed and thumb marked the 
same with blank columns and later on, he, in connivance with 
the parents of bride, introduced certain conditions which were 
never settled between the parties; that malafide on the part of 
Nikah Khawan/Registrar is evident from the fact that during 
evidence he stated in clear-cut words that his licence was never 
cancelled but the documents produced by the petitioner speak 
otherwise; that Nikah Khawan/Registrar was summoned by the 
Court (who was wrongly marked as DW-3 instead of CW) but 
respondent No.1 did not cross-examine him to unveil the truth 
simply for the reason that she, being beneficiary of interpolation 
in the Nikah Nama, was not ready to unearth the truth; that 
admission on the part of the Nikah Khawan/Registrar that 
Nikah Nama was deposited with the Secretary Union Council 
after seventeen days of marriage stands proof of the fact that he 
tinkered with entries of Nikah Nama from the date of marriage 
till deposit of the same in the Union Council; that bona fide of 
the petitioner is evinced from the fact that he filed application 
before the trial court for summoning of the Secretary Union 
Council as witness but the same was dismissed by learned trial 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--5-- 
Court on the ground that after recording statement of Nikah 
Khawan/Registrar, there was no need for examination of the 
Secretary Union Council concerned; that since the petitioner 
has been paying maintenance of the minor without any fail, no 
ill-will can be attributed to him and that the petitioner is ready 
to continue payment of maintenance of the minor as per 
judgment and decree of the learned appellate Court.  
4. 
Conversely, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondents, while opposing the submissions made by learned 
counsel for the petitioner, states that since it was mentioned 
against column No.16 of Nikah Nama that dowry articles worth 
Rs.2,00,000/- were given to respondent No.1, the petitioner 
being signatory of said document, could not escape his liability 
to return the same or to pay its alternate price to respondent 
No.1; that there is no material difference in entries of Nikah 
Namas, referred by learned counsel for the petitioner, thus, the 
same cannot be used to the dis-interest of respondent No.1; that 
when the petitioner himself admitted in evidence that father of 
respondent No.1 was an agriculturalist by profession, it did not 
lie in his mouth to claim that her parents did not enjoy sound 
financial position at the time of marriage; that on the one hand 
stance of the petitioner is that no dowry articles were given to 
respondent No.1 but on the other, during cross-examine, he 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--6-- 
while taking U-turn stated that the dowry articles, given by the 
parents of respondent No.1, were returned to her; that the 
petitioner, being owner of about 800-kanals of land, can afford 
maintenance of the minor at much higher rate as decreed by 
learned appellate Court; that since the petitioner was dealt with 
leniently by the learned trial Court, no further leniency can be 
shown by this Court in exercise of its constitutional jurisdiction 
vested under Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973; that the petitioner is maintaining 
children from his first wife in a proper manner and the 
respondents would be satisfied if similar treatment is given to 
the minor; that the petitioner while appearing as DW-1 admitted 
that he put his signatures on the Nikah Nama in English, thus, it 
cannot be believed that such literate person signed the same 
without entries against all columns of Nikah Nama; that a 
cursory glance over the Nikah Nama, referred by learned 
counsel for the petitioner, shows that nowhere respondent No.1 
claimed herself to be a bachelor rather she was mentioned as 
divorcee in the Nikah Nama, thus, the petitioner cannot take 
premium of any minor discrepancy in the statements of the 
PWs; that mala fide on the part of the petitioner is established 
from the fact that certain amount on account of maintenance of 
the minor is due against him and that the quantum of 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--7-- 
maintenance fixed by learned appellate Court is hardly 
sufficient to meet with the expenses of the minor especially her 
educational expenditures.  
5. 
While exercising his right of rebuttal, learned counsel for 
the petitioner submits that the intention of the petitioner to 
produce various copies of Nikah Nama is to establish that not 
only the names of the witnesses were different on all of them 
but also entries of said Nikah Namas were not filled in at the 
time of marriage rather the same were filled in by the Nikah 
Khawan/Registrar at some subsequent stage in connivance with 
parents of respondent No.1 and that stance of respondent No.1 
that her parents enjoyed sound financial status stands negated 
from her plea that now-a-days she is earning her bread and 
butter by working as housemaid in Lahore city inasmuch as 
according to custom in the locality where the parties are 
residing, if any daughter is divorced/deserted by her husband, 
her parents or brothers use to maintain her.  
6. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at 
considerable length and have also gone through the documents, 
annexed with this petition. 
7. 
Firstly, taking up the question as to whether dowry 
articles were given to respondent No.1 or not, I have noted that 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--8-- 
though in the written statement the petitioner claimed that since 
it was second marriage of respondent No.1, no dowry articles 
were given but said stance of petitioner stands negated from the 
following portion from his affidavit-in-evidence (Exh.D-1):  
 
 دماعہیلع یک دعم وموجدیگ ںیم دمہیع ےک رہتش داران ، اھبیئ اور وادلنی دماعہیلع ےک رھگ ےس امتم رھگولی اسامن وچری
رک ےک ےل ےئگ۔ 
 
Further, with a view to improve his case, the petitioner during 
his cross-examination introduced a new story that the dowry 
articles given to respondent No.1 were taken back by her 
parents. In this regard, following portion from the statement of 
petitioner can be referred with convenience:- 
 ہی درتس ےہ ہک ریمے اپس اسامن ااھٹےن یک ابتب وکیئ رحتریی وبثت ہن ےہ۔ از وخد اہک ہک ںیم اس وتق رھگ ہن اھت
بج اسامن ااھٹای ایگ۔ 
Moreover, Ghulam Nabi (DW-2) in his affidavit-in-evidence 
(Ex.D-2) averred as under: 
 دماع ہیلع یک دعم وموجدیگ
ںیم دمہیع ، وادل دمہیع و درگیان ےن دماعہیلع ےک رھگ ےس امتم رھگولی اسامن وچری رک ایل ا
و ر
اےنپ رجم رپ رپدہ ڈاےنل ےئلیک دوعٰی ونعان ابال دارئ رک دای
۔ 
However, the said witness during his cross examination, while 
responding to a question relating to return of dowry articles 
stated as under: - 
 اسامن زیہج ریمی وموجدیگ ںیم دمہیع ےک وادلنی اُاھٹ ےک ےل ےئگ ےھت۔ اسامن زیہج اُاھٹےن یک ابتب ریمے اپس
وکیئ رحتریی وبثت ہن ےہ
۔ 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--9-- 
A conjunctive reading of the afore-quoted portions from the 
statements of DW-1 and DW-2 renders its crystal clear that 
dowry articles were given to respondent No.1 notwithstanding 
the entry against column No.16 of Nikah Nama. 
8. 
I am in agreement with the learned counsel for the 
petitioner that Column No.16 of Nikah Nama is meant for 
mentioning of anything which is given to a bride as part of 
dower in addition to cash in terms of Column No.13 of Nikah 
Nama but when the petitioner himself admitted that dowry 
articles, given to respondent No.1, were either stolen by her 
parents or they received the same back, adverse opinion cannot 
be formed against respondent No.1 simply for the reason that 
factum of dowry articles was mentioned against an irrelevant 
column of Nikah Nama. 
9. 
According to section 6(2A) of the Muslim Family Laws 
Ordinance, 1961, the Nikah Registrar or the person who 
solemnizes a Nikah shall accurately fill all the columns of 
the nikahnama form with specific answers of the bride or the 
bridegroom. Moreover, according to section 5(5) of the said 
Ordinance, the form of nikahnama, the registers to be 
maintained by Nikah Registrars, the records to be preserved by 
Union Councils, the manner in which marriages shall be 
registered and copies of nikahnama shall be supplied to the 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--10-- 
parties, and the fees to be charged therefor, shall be such as may 
be prescribed. If Nikah Khawan/Registrar fails to perform his 
duties diligently instead of taking any action against any party, 
Nikah Khawan/Registrar should be held accountable as held by 
this court in the case reported as Shah Din and others v. The 
State (PLD 1984 LHR 137) relevant part whereof reads as 
under:- 
“7. I feel here mentioning an important point having far 
reaching consequences. The incidents giving rise to 
proceedings like the one in hand can be greatly reduced 
if the Nikah Registrars appointed under the Muslim 
Family Laws Ordinance, 1961, instead of simply filling 
the various columns of the Nikahnama, in routine, realize 
that the duty that they are required to perform is very 
sacred because rights to succession, maintenance, dower, 
divorce, legitimacy of children and several other rights 
flow from a valid marriage. As public servants which 
essentially they are, they should demonstrate more sense 
of responsibility before authenticating the Nikah by 
making proper enquiries as to the competency of the 
parties to understand the nature of their act, their ages 
and whether or not they are so acting of their free will 
and without any compulsion. 
  
In our society, the girl is normally given in marriage by 
her parents and in their absence by the nearest blood 
relation and that too mostly at her ordinary place of 
residence. If this solemn ceremony is performed by the 
persons not answering the above description and at a 
place other than the ordinary place of residence of the 
girl in closed doors under mysterious circumstances a 
heavy duty is cast on the Nikah Registrars to thoroughly 
confirm and probe into the circumstance under which the 
marriage is being solemnized before authenticating the 
same. If they fail, they can, to a grant (sic) extent, be held 
responsible for the complications that follow in addition, 
to running the risk of being involved in litigation, both 
civil and criminal.” 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--11-- 
 
Further, this Court, while highlighting the violation of the 
SOPs/Policy issued by the Director General, Local Government  
and its repercussions inter alia observed as under:-   
“5. 
It may further be appropriate to observe that 
although in compliance with the above noted directions 
issued by this Court, the Directorate General LG&CD 
Punjab, Lahore has issued SOPs vide Notification 
No.LG&CD/AD(CD)47/2020/Court 
Cases, 
dated 
27.08.2020, but still the violations of the above noted 
provisions, directions and SOPs are being made by the 
Nikah Khawan/Nikah Registrars and others. The Nikah 
Registrars instead of filling in, each column of the 
Nikahnama with specific reply/answer of the parties to 
the marriage, are still continuing with their practice of 
placing single vertical line against all or more than one 
column or leaving the columns blank in the Nikah Nama, 
rendering themselves liable for initiation of proceedings 
against them under the law. After perusing the Nikah-
nama (Annexure-A) appended with the file, it evinces that 
against most of the columns of the Nikahnama, the Nikah 
Registrar has opted to place single vertical line and had 
also left some of the columns blank. He has not 
accurately fill in the same with requisite/specific reply of 
bride or the bridegroom, which is clear-cut violation of 
the aforesaid directions issued by this Court and the 
SOPs issued by the Directorate General LG and CD 
Punjab, Lahore. Therefore, the matter is referred to the 
Chief Officer, Burewala, District Vehari for initiation of 
penal 
proceedings 
against 
the 
Nikah 
Registrar/ 
delinquent, after affording an opportunity of hearing to 
him and report thereof shall reach to this Court through 
D.R Judicial within a period of one month, after receipt 
of copy of this order.” 
 
 
 
Though, the direction/observation of this Court does not admit 
any kind of ambiguity but even then public-at-large is facing 
unnecessary litigation on account of inefficiency on the part of 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--12-- 
the Nikah Khawan/Registrar towards completion of entries in 
Nikah Nama inviting stern action against the hoodlums. 
10. 
Now coming to the plea of the petitioner that since 
certain conditions, which were not settled between the parties, 
were incorporated by the Nikah Khawan/Registrar in Nikah 
Nama, I am of the opinion that if the petitioner was of the view 
that the Nikah Khawan/Registrar mentioned un-settled 
conditions in the Nikah Nama, he could conveniently approach 
the Deputy Commissioner or the authorities of the Local 
Government concerned for rectification in addition to putting 
the criminal machinery in motion by filing a complaint before 
the relevant authority as a Nikah Khawan/Registrar falls within 
the definition of „public servant‟ in terms of section 21 of 
Pakistan Penal Code. Though learned counsel for the petitioner 
addressed the Court at certain length but has not referred to any 
material to show that the petitioner challenged the entries of 
Nikah Nama before relevant forum, thus he cannot take 
premium of inaction on his part.  
11. 
Now the next question which boils down for 
determination by this Court as to whether dowry articles given 
to respondent No.1 were returned to her by the petitioner or not. 
Initially, the onus to prove that dowry articles were given to her 
was on the shoulders of respondents No.1 but when DW-1 and 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--13-- 
DW-2 stated that dowry articles, given to respondent No.1, 
were either stolen or received back by her parents, it was 
responsibility of the petitioner to prove that dowry articles 
given to respondent No.1 were returned. While replying to a 
question as to whether they were equipped with any proof 
relating to return of dowry articles, DW-1 and DW-2 answered 
in negative. It is well settled by now that if an oral assertion of a 
witness is not corroborated by relevant document, it is not safe 
to rely upon such oral assertion while deciding lis between the 
parties. 
12. 
It is important to mention over here that while entering in 
witness box as DW-1, the petitioner, during cross-examination, 
admitted that Muhammad Khan, father of respondent No.1, was 
an agriculturist by profession. According to the custom 
prevalent in our society, families having agriculturist 
background, use to give dowry articles to their daughters at the 
time of marriage irrespective of the fact as to whether it was her 
first or second marriage.  Further, learned counsel for the 
petitioner has not been able to convince this Court as to why 
dowry articles were not given to respondent No.1 rather his 
stance was that as first wedding night was solemnized in the 
house of paternal uncle of the petitioner, no dowry articles were 
given at the time of marriage.  In this regard, I do not see eye-

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--14-- 
to-eye with learned counsel for the petitioner for the reason that 
according to own showing of the petitioner he had earlier 
marriage, thus, spending of first night of marriage in the house 
of his paternal uncle is understandable, thus, said fact cannot be 
used to believe that dowry articles were not given to respondent 
No.1.  
13. 
Now coming to the question regarding the quantum of 
dowry articles, this Court is of the view that as father of 
respondent No.1 was owner of reasonable chunk of land at the 
time of marriage between the parties, it cannot be believed that 
he was not in a position to give dowry articles worth 
Rs.2,00,000/- to his daughter. It has also not specifically been 
denied by learned counsel for the petitioner that there is custom 
in the locality that daughters are given dowry articles at the 
time of their marriage.  Thus, findings of both the courts below 
on the point of dowry articles do not warrant any interference 
by this Court. 
14. 
Now coming to the quantum of maintenance of the 
minor, I am of the view that when a person enjoys bliss of more 
than one wife he is bound to maintain his wives and children in 
a befitting manner. Reliance in this regard can be placed on the 
case reported as Mian Arif Mehmood v. Mst. Tanvir Fatima and 
another (PLD 2004 Lahore 316) wherein the liability of a 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--15-- 
husband having more than one wife has been dilated upon in 
the following manner: -  
“10. This brings me to the most important question 
involved in this petition, viz. the quantum of maintenance 
of Rs.8,000 per mensem awarded in favour of the 
respondent. Learned counsel for the petitioner has 
submitted that it is unreasonable. According to him, the 
intention of the law is to provide maintenance against 
starvation and consequent vagrancy, and it had never 
been the intendment of the Legislature to provide 
anything more than food, clothing and bedding. The 
contention has no force. Section 9 of the Muslim Family 
Laws Ordinance, 1961 reads as follows:-- 
"9.Maintenance.--(1) If any husband fails to 
maintain his wife adequately or where, there are 
more wives than one fails to maintain them 
equitably, the wife, or all or any of the wives may 
in addition to seeking any other legal remedy 
available, apply to the Chairman who shall 
constitute an Arbitration Council to determine the 
matter, and the Arbitration Council may issue a 
certificate specifying the amount which shall be 
paid as maintenance by the husband. 
(2) A husband or' wife may in the prescribed 
manner, within the prescribed period, and on 
payment of the prescribed fee, prefer an 
application for revision of the certificate, to the 
Collector, concerned and his decision shall be 
final and shall not be called in question in any 
Court. 
(3) Any amount payable under subsection (1) or 
(2) if not paid in due time shall be recoverable as 
arrears of land revenue." 
A plain reading of section 9 (ibid) means that a husband 
has to maintain, his wife "adequately" and if he has more 
wives than one, he must, maintain them "equitably". 
Therefore, the maintenance should not be bare minimum 
sustenance allowance but a convenient provision in 
consonance with what the husband can afford as also 
what are the needs of the wife. It is not the meeting of the 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--16-- 
mere wants by way of sustenance because in these days 
of inflationary trend and the constant rise in the cost of 
living index, it is bound to work hardship on the wife. A 
person taking on the responsibility of marriage has to 
maintain his wife, and it is in all cases necessary to 
ascertain the visible means and the earning capacity of 
the husband. Therefore, in fixing the maintenance, the 
Court has to take into consideration not only the needs of 
the wife but also the paying capacity and circumstances 
of the husband who is liable to pay maintenance. 
Whereas to insist upon conformance to the principle of 
bare minimum sustenance allowance, particularly in a 
case where the husband is in affluent circumstances, 
would be not only inequitable but, unjustified, if upon 
consideration of visible income of the husband, he is 
found to be able to pay a little more to keep up the wife 
going on an, even keel, it cannot be said that the Court 
would thereby be pampering a wife who seeks to live 
apart from the husband. However, the maintenance 
allowance should neither be too heavy so as to tempt the 
wife to stay away from her husband, neither too meager 
so as to leave her high and dry. In my opinion, the 
balance has to be struck. The amount of maintenance 
payable to a wife should not be so small as to simply 
keep her body and soul together. It has to be an amount 
which could be enough to keep her at least financially in 
comfort, particularly in these days of high and rising 
prices. In regard to determining what is; required by the 
wife, the Court has to steer clear of two extremes viz. it 
must not give maintenance to a wife which would keep 
her in luxury and would make judicial separation 
profitable, and also impede any future reconciliation. It 
must also steer clear of the other extreme, viz. 
penuriousness. Steering clear of these two extremes the 
Court must see whether the amount to be fixed as 
maintenance would be liberal or illiberal. If this is kept 
in view, may be the couple will see the error of their ways 
and might get reconciled and lead a happy domestic life, 
unless they have already parted ways, as is the case here. 
11. The question of quantum of maintenance is a matter 
primarily in the discretion of the trial Court which has to 
take into consideration several factors, like the status of 
the family, the learning capacity, commitments of the 
husband, and what is required by the wife to maintain 
herself. In the present case, the respondent has led 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--17-- 
evidence to show that the petitioner is possessed of 
considerable assets and income. Since the petitioner has 
remained ex parte before the Arbitration Council, there 
is nothing on record to controvert the evidence adduced 
by the respondent. Even in his revision petition and the 
writ petition, the petitioner has not thrown a successful 
challenge to the evidence produced by the respondent. 
Moreover, it is not the case of the petitioner that the 
respondent is a lady who, belongs to a class who go out 
for work for earning their livelihood. Since the petitioner 
had not entered appearance before the Arbitration 
Council and was proceeded against ex parte, there is 
nothing on record to dislodge the evidence produced by 
the respondent. The petitioner has not brought on record 
of this petition even the evidence produced before the 
Arbitration 
Council 
by 
the 
respondent. 
In 
the 
circumstances, it cannot be said that any material piece 
of evidence has been misread or excluded from 
consideration.” 
If the quantum of maintenance of the minor is considered in the 
light of the afore-quoted judgment, the documents produced by 
learned counsel for the respondents during the course of 
arguments are suggestive of the fact that respondent No.1 is 
incurring huge amount on maintenance of the minor especially 
towards her educational expenses. Likewise, since respondent 
No.1 did not bother to challenge the findings of learned trial 
Court on the point of maintenance for the minor, she cannot 
claim increase in the maintenance more than that decreed by the 
learned trial Court. Moreover, the question as to whether 
anything is outstanding against the petitioner on account of 
maintenance of the minor, the same would be decided by the 
learned executing court, thus, any observation made in that 

 
 
 
 
W.P. No.4265 of  2020. 
 
 
--18-- 
regard may prejudice the case of either party before the 
executing forum.  
15. 
For what has been discussed above, while dismissing 
this petition connected petition is partially accepted and 
findings of the learned appellate Court on the point of 
maintenance of the minor are set-aside. As a result, findings of 
learned trial Court on the said point shall hold the field. Rest of 
the findings of the learned appellate Court shall remain intact. 
No order as to costs. 
16. 
Before parting with this order, it is observed that if in 
future respondent No.1 considers the quantum of maintenance 
insufficient to cater for the needs of the minor, she would be at 
liberty to institute fresh suit or to file miscellaneous application 
for increase in the awarded maintenance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
Approved for Reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
Jamil* 

