Form No.HCJD/C-121 
ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE  
       JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
W.P. No.35336 of 2024. 
Muhammad Ilyas.   
   Versus 
Muhammad Saeed, etc. 
 
S.No.of order/ 
Proceeding 
Date of Order/ 
Proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge, and that of 
parties’ counsel, where necessary. 
05.06.2024 
Mr. Amjad Qayum, Advocate for the petitioner.  
 
 
In this petition under Article 199 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, the 
petitioner has assailed the order dated 02.04.2024 
passed by the Special Judge Rent, Gujranwala whereby 
application of the petitioner for setting aside ex-parte 
final order was dismissed as well as the judgment dated 
23.04.2024 passed by the Additional District Judge, 
Gujranwala whereby appeal of the petitioner there-
against was also dismissed.  
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that 
the impugned decisions of the courts below are against 
the law and facts and result of misapplication of law 
inasmuch as the petitioner was not aware about the 
proceedings as no notice was ever served upon the 
petitioner.  
3. 
The impugned judgment dated 23.04.2024 of the 
lower appellate court has been passed to the following 
effect:- 
“9. 
In the instant case appellant/tenant was 
served personally and learned trial court had 
recorded the statement of Process Server in this 
regard who on oath submitted that he effected 
service of appellant in person. It is manifest from 
the record that appellant/tenant has filed simple 
application for setting aside ex-parte proceedings 
and final order, whereas no application for leave to 
contest has been accompanied alongwith the said 

2 
W.P. No.35336 of 2024 
 
petition which is against the spirit of Section 21(4) 
of the Punjab Rented Premises Act, 2009.”  
 
4. 
When confronted, learned counsel for the 
petitioner concedes that although no application for 
leave to contest was filed, however, specific plea was 
taken in the application for setting aside ex-parte final 
order to question ownership of respondent No.1 qua 
demised premises which warranted grant of leave, 
framing of issues and decision after recording of 
evidence.  
5. 
Section 21(4) of the Punjab Rented Premises Act, 
2009 (‘Act’) states that if an ex-parte order is passed 
against a respondent, the respondent may, within ten 
days from the date of knowledge, apply to the Rent 
Tribunal for setting aside ex-parte order along with an 
application for leave to contest. Section 22(3) of the Act 
provides that an application for leave to contest shall be 
in the form of a written reply, stating grounds on which 
the leave is sought and shall be accompanied by an 
affidavit of the respondent, copy of all relevant 
documents in his possession and, if desired, affidavits 
of not more than two witnesses.  
6. 
From perusal of Section 21(4) of the Act, it is 
abundantly clear that while applying for setting aside 
ex-parte order, a separate application for leave to 
contest, in the form and manner prescribed in Section 
22(3) of the Act has to be filed within the period of 
limitation. Any plea taken on merits of the case in the 
application for setting aside ex-parte order passed by 
the Rent Tribunal under Section 21 of the Act without 
an application seeking leave to contest in the form and 

3 
W.P. No.35336 of 2024 
 
manner prescribed under Section 22(3) of the Act 
cannot be taken into consideration. Therefore, the 
impugned order dated 23.04.2024 is unexceptionable 
and warrants no interference.  
7. 
In view of foregoing, no illegality, infirmity or 
jurisdictional error has been pointed out by learned 
counsel for the petitioner in the impugned decisions of 
the courts below warranting interference of this Court 
in the exercise of jurisdiction under Article 199 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 
Resultantly, instant petition, being devoid of any merit, 
is hereby dismissed in limine. 
 
 
           
                                       (RAHEEL KAMRAN) 
     
   JUDGE  
 
Approved for reporting. 
 
JUDGE 
 
              *Asim Shahzad* 

