                           StereoHCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
LAHORE HIGH COURT  
BAHAWALPUR BENCH, BAHAWALPUR 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
C.R No.326 of 2022/BWP 
 
 
Municipal Committee etc.    Vs.   Jam Brothers  
 
JUDGMENT 
 
Date of hearing: 25.03.2024 
 
Petitioners by: 
Jam Muhammad Afzal Gasoora, Advocate. 
 
Respondents by: Mr. Abdul Basit Khan, Advocate. 
 
 
  
 
Shujaat Ali Khan, J: - Unnecessary details apart, the 
Municipal Committee, Liaqatpur (hereinafter to be referred as 
the Committee), District Rahim Yar Khan entered into a 
contract with M/s Jam Brothers (hereinafter to be referred as 
respondent-contractor) relating to improvement of water supply 
scheme. Upon completion of the work awarded to the 
respondent-contractor, it handed-over the scheme to the 
Committee but when the Committee withheld certain amount due 
to the respondent-contractor, it approached this Court by filing 
Writ Petition (No.4905 of 2012) which was disposed of through 
order, dated 24.10.2016, by referring the matter to the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.326 of 2022/BWP. 
 
 
--2-- 
Adjudicator, with consent of the parties, as per the contract. The 
Adjudicator decided the same in favour of respondent-contractor 
through its decision, dated 29.04.2017, by declaring it entitled to 
receive Rs.1,76,12,248/- from the Committee. Being dissatisfied 
with the decision of the Adjudicator, the Committee filed an 
application before the Civil Court, Liaqatpur (learned Trial 
Court) in terms of Section 20 of Arbitration Act 1940 (the Act, 
1940), for appointment of the Arbitrator, which was accepted and 
with the mutual consent of the parties the Executive Engineer, 
Public Health Engineering Division, Rahim Yar Khan, was 
appointed as sole Arbitrator who gave its award, on 23.05.2018, 
by modifying the decision of the Adjudicator to the extent that 
respondent-contractor was declared entitled to recover 
Rs.1,59,96,950/- alongwith interest as per bank rate. Thereafter, 
respondent-contractor filed application before the learned Trial 
Court to make the award of the Arbitrator as rule of Court. In 
view of the objections raised by the Committee learned Trial 
Court, through order, dated 09.10.2019, remitted the matter back 
to the Arbitrator in terms of section 16 of the Act, 1940. The 
Arbitrator resubmitted the award before the learned Trial Court, 
on 04.12.2019. Though the respondent-contractor did not opt to 
file any objection against the award announced by the Arbitrator 

 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.326 of 2022/BWP. 
 
 
--3-- 
but the Committee filed its objections. After considering 
objections of the Committee and hearing the arguments of both 
sides, the learned Trial Court, through order, dated 12.10.2020, 
accepted the application of the respondent-contractor and made 
the award as rule of the court. Being dissatisfied with the decision 
of the learned Trial Court, the Committee filed an appeal but 
without any success as the same was dismissed by the learned 
Additional District Judge, Liaqatpur (the learned Appellate 
Court), through judgment dated 22.01.2022; hence this petition. 
2. 
Learned counsel for the Committee submits that as award 
announced by the Arbitrator was never brought on record, as per 
prescribed procedure, the decisions of the courts below are not 
tenable. Adds that due to frequent change of Provincial 
Government during the last four years, the Legal Advisors of the 
Committee had been changed, thus, the appeal filed by the 
Committee could not be pursued diligently. Further adds that 
since decree has been passed against TMA but the claim of the 
respondent-contractor against the Committee is not sustainable. 
Argues that though since the year 2015, TMA has been merged 
into District Council, it is liability of the District Council to 
liquidate the liability towards the respondent-contractor but the 
execution petition has been filed against the Committee. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.326 of 2022/BWP. 
 
 
--4-- 
3. 
Conversely, learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
respondent-contractor, while defending the impugned decision, 
states that since an amount of Rs.20,00,000/- has already been 
paid by the Committee to respondent-contractor towards 
satisfaction of the decree, it cannot claim that decree passed by 
the learned Trial Court cannot be executed against it; that since 
the Arbitrator was appointed with the consent of the parties, it 
does not lie in the mouth of the Committee to claim that award 
was not brought on record through proper procedure and that 
release of security amount of the respondent-contractor, coupled 
with issuance of the Appreciation Letter in its favour, stands 
proof of  the fact that the work awarded to the respondent-
contractor was completed satisfactorily but withholding of 
Rs.1,60,00,000/- is beyond the comprehension of man of prudent 
mind.  
4. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner, while exercising his 
right of rebuttal, submits that payment of Rs.20,00,000/- was 
made by the Committee due to the coercive measures adopted by 
the learned Executing Court, thus, the said fact cannot be used 
against it. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.326 of 2022/BWP. 
 
 
--5-- 
5. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at considerable 
length and have gone through the documents appended with this 
petition.  
6. 
It is admitted position that the Arbitrator was appointed 
with the consent of the parties, thus, at this stage the Committee 
cannot claim that the Arbitrator connived with the respondent-
contractor. Moreover, if the Committee was not satisfied with the 
conduct of the Arbitrator it could conveniently move for change 
thereof while invoking provisions of sections 11 & 12 of the Act, 
1940, but when the Committee acquiesced with the proceedings 
conducted by the Arbitrator, it has no authority to challenge the 
impartiality of the Arbitrator, at this stage. 
While scanning the record, I have noted that the Arbitrator, 
while coming to the conclusion that the Adjudicator awarded 
excess amount as compared to the outstanding dues of 
respondent-contractor, curtailed the same reasonably which fact 
is sufficient to repel the contention of learned counsel 
representing the Committee that the Arbitrator announced the 
award after having been connived with respondent-contractor. 
7. 
A perusal of the record shows that in view of the 
objections raised by the Committee, the learned Trial Court 

 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.326 of 2022/BWP. 
 
 
--6-- 
remitted the matter to the Arbitrator in terms of Section 16 of the 
Act, 1940, through order dated 09.10.2019 and if the Committee 
was not satisfied with the findings of the learned Trial Court 
spurning its objection against the conduct of the Arbitrator, it 
could challenge the said order in appropriate proceedings but 
when the Committee acquiesced with order, dated 09.10.2019 it 
was not open for him to agitate the said issue again upon 
resubmission of the award by the Arbitrator. 
8. 
A bird’s eye view over the documents, appended with this 
petition, renders it crystal clear that conduct of the Committee, 
during the entire proceedings, remained sluggish. To fortify said 
fact, reference can be made to the following portion from the 
judgment of learned Appellate Court: - 
“2. 
It is pertinent to mention here that multiple 
opportunities were given to the learned counsel for 
appellants for arguments but he failed to advance 
arguments so, as the appellants and learned counsel for 
appellants were earlier warned in this regard, in view of 
the esteemed case law cited as PLJ 2011 SC 82 after 
hearing arguments of the respondents and after going 
through 
the 
record, 
appeal 
is 
being 
decided 
accordingly……”  
When confronted with the above portion from the judgment of 
the learned Appellate Court, though learned counsel for the 
appellant tried to justify dilly-dally tactics on the part of the 
counsel for the Committee by submitting that due to frequent 

 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.326 of 2022/BWP. 
 
 
--7-- 
change of the government at provincial level the Legal Advisor 
of the Committee kept changing but this Court does not find that 
justification acceptable for the reason that irrespective of change 
of the government, affairs of a government institution are run by 
the officers/officials.  
9. 
During the course of arguments, learned counsel 
representing the Committee admitted that Rs.20,00,000/- has 
already been paid to the respondent-contractor towards 
satisfaction of the decree with the plea that the same has been 
paid due to the coercive measures adopted by the learned 
Executing Court. It does not appeal to man of ordinary prudence 
that when a judgment-debtor can assail any order of the learned 
Executing Court before any higher forum, as to how his/her 
assertion that he performed any act towards part satisfaction of 
the decree under coercion of the learned Executing Court. 
Though, learned counsel representing the Committee addressed 
the Court at reasonable length but has not been able to convince 
this Court that as to why the Committee did not take remedial 
measures against the coercive measures being adopted by the 
learned Executing Court especially when matter was pending 
before this Court.  It is well established by now that when a 
decree holder takes any step, even partial, towards satisfaction of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.326 of 2022/BWP. 
 
 
--8-- 
the decree, it cannot challenge the validity of the said decree. 
Reliance in this regard is placed on the cases reported as Silver 
Star Insurance Co. Ltd. Lahore though Chief Executive v. Messrs 
Kamal Pipes Industries, Lahore and another (2023 CLD 1342) 
and Province of West Pakistan v. Haji Muhammad Juman and 
another (PLD 1960 (W.P.) Karachi 908). In the former 
judgment a learned Division Bench of this Court, while dealing 
with the effect on appeal filed by the judgment-debtor in the 
cases wherein he/she has already partly satisfied the decree, has 
inter-alia observed as under: -  
“5. Undeniably, 
appellants 
freely 
and 
explicitly 
acknowledged the claim of respondent No.1, payment of 
partial claim to respondent and also showed readiness to 
settle the outstanding amount, which is tantamount to 
admission of its liability regarding the decretal amount. 
Needless to say that an admission/statement/undertaking, 
by a party, during the judicial proceedings has to be given 
sanctity while applying the principle of legal estoppel and 
estoppel by conduct as well as to respect moral and ethical 
rules. Hence, at any subsequent stage, a party cannot turn 
around to wriggle out from the consequence of such 
admission. If disclaimer therefrom is allowed as a matter 
of right, then it will definitely result into distrust of the 
public litigants over the judicial proceedings. Article 114 
of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 provides that when 
a person has by his declaration, act or omission 
intentionally caused or permitted another person to 
believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, 
neither he nor his representative is allowed in any suit or 
proceedings between the parties to deny the truth of that 
thing. This provision enacts a rule of evidence whereby a 
person is not allowed to plead contrary to a fact or a state 
of thing which he formerly asserted as existing and made 

 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.326 of 2022/BWP. 
 
 
--9-- 
the other party to believe it as such and then acted on it on 
such belief. In fact, this principle is founded on equity and 
justness with straightforward objective to prevent fraud 
and ensure justice. Reference can be made to Sardar Ali 
Khan v. State Bank of Pakistan and others (2022 SCMR 
1454), Combined Investment (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Wali Bhai and 
others (PLD 2016 Supreme Court 730), Mst. Ghazala 
Zakir v. Muhammad Khurshid and 7 others (1997 CLC 
167), Muhammad Majid Iqbal through Special Attorney v. 
Judge Family Court, Dunya Pur and 2 others (2021 CLC 
644), Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Defence, 
Islamabad and 2 others v. Wadero Lal Bux (2021 CLC 
1609) and Mushtaq Ahmad v. Mohsin Iqbal (2022 CLC 
1461).” 
10. 
Now coming to the plea of the learned counsel for the 
Committee that though the decree has been passed against the 
TMA which has already merged into District Council but the 
Execution Petition has been filed against the Committee, I am of 
the view that when the Committee itself has paid the aforesaid 
amount towards part satisfaction of the decree, it cannot shrug 
off its liability towards the satisfaction of the decree in its 
entirety.  
11. 
It is well settled by now that civil court cannot sit as court 
of appeal on the decision of an Arbitrator as the Arbitrator is 
considered best Judge of the factual controversy between the 
parties. Reliance in this regard is placed on the cases of Messrs 
Waheed Brothers (Pakistan) Ltd. Lahore through Chief 
Executive v. Messrs Izhar (Pvt.) Ltd. Lahore through Managing 
Director (2002 SCMR 366) and National Highway Authority 

 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.326 of 2022/BWP. 
 
 
--10-- 
through Director (Legal) v. Lilley International (Pvt.) Ltd. And 
another (2020 CLC 608). In the case of Messrs Waheed Brothers 
(Pakistan) Ltd. Lahore through Chief Executive (Supra), the 
Apex Court of the country, while dealing with role of the courts 
under the Act, 1940 inter-alia held as under: - 
“14.*****The role of the courts under the Arbitration Act, 
1940 principally is of supervisory nature and not that of 
appellate power under C.P.C……” 
If the pleas raised by learned counsel for the Committee are 
considered in the light of afore-referred judgment of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan, there leaves no ambiguity that the 
same are hardly sufficient to interfere with the matter in hand.   
12. 
During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the 
Committee put much emphasis on the fact that as the Award was 
not brought on record of the learned Trial Court same could not 
be made as rule of Court.  The said assertion of the learned 
counsel representing the Committee cannot be entertained 
simply for the reason that if award was not filed before the Court 
by the Arbitrator in terms of section 14 of the Act, 1940 as to 
how could the Committee submitted objections to the Award 
announced by the Arbitrator. A cursory glance over the order 
passed by the learned Trial Court shows that it made the award 
as rule of the Court after discussing every limb of the matter.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.326 of 2022/BWP. 
 
 
--11-- 
Even otherwise, it is well entrenched by now that while 
dealing with a matter under the provisions of the Act, 1940, the 
prime duty of the Court is to uphold the award instead of setting 
it aside for trivial reasons. Reliance in this regard is placed on the 
cases reported as Durga Prosad Chamria and another v. 
Sewkishendas Bhattar and others (PLD 1949 Privy Council 
187) and Ashfaq Ali Qureshi v. Municipal Corporation Multan 
and another (1984 SCMR 597). In the former case, the Privy 
Council while dealing with the powers of the court to set aside 
an award has inter-alia held as under: - 
“9.*****However, that may be, their Lordship are 
satisfied that the two points of law as to which it is said 
that the Arbitrator’s error vitiates the award would be 
contrary to the well-established principles such as are laid 
down in In re King and Duveen (1) and F R Absalom Ltd. 
V. Greet West (London) Garden Village Society (2) for a 
Court of law to interfere with the Award even if the Court 
itself would have taken a different view of either of the 
points of law had they been before it.” 
13. 
It is very strange to note that on the one hand the 
Committee has questioned the validity of the award which has 
been made rule of the court by the learned Trial Court but on the 
other has taken the stance that the decree cannot be executed 
against it rather the District Council being the successor of 
erstwhile TMA is bound to satisfy the same. Both these pleas do 
not coincide with each other. At the cost of repetition, it is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.326 of 2022/BWP. 
 
 
--12-- 
observed that when the Committee has already paid 
Rs.20,00,000/- towards part satisfaction of the decree, it cannot 
avoid the satisfaction of the decree in its entirety. 
14. 
It is a classic case of red-tapism inasmuch as not only the 
completion certificate was issued in favour of respondent-
contractor in token of satisfactory completion of the awarded 
work but also appreciation letter was issued to it. In this scenario, 
withholding of certain amount of respondent-contractor on the 
basis of the report of a company whose recommendations did not 
find favour at the hands of the Arbitrator is not understandable. 
Due to such uncalled-for conduct of the government 
functionaries the contractors lose their interest in execution of 
work in government departments. Had there been any deficiency 
on the part of respondent-contractor the Committee was under no 
obligation to issue completion certificate and appreciation letter. 
15. 
As per law laid down by the apex Court of the country in 
the case of Muhammad Idrees and others v. Muhammad Pervaiz 
and others (2010 SCMR 5) concurrent findings of facts recorded 
by the courts below cannot be upset by this Court in exercise of 
its revisional jurisdiction in a casual manner until and unless the 
same are proved to be perverse or arbitrary or the same are based 

 
 
 
 
 
 
C.R No.326 of 2022/BWP. 
 
 
--13-- 
on misreading or non-reading of evidence which is not the 
position in the case in hand. 
16. 
For what has been discussed above, I see no force in this 
petition which is dismissed with no order as to cost. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
Approved for Reporting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
Tanvir* 

