StereoHCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893 of 2017 
 
 
Muhammad Ismail & others    Vs.   Allah Wasaya & others  
 
JUDGMENT 
 
Dates of hearing: 
29.10.2024 & 31.10.2024. 
 
Petitioners by: 
Mr. Zulfiqar Ahmad, Advocate.  
 
Respondents by: 
Malik Asif Iqbal, Advocate. 
 
 
  
 
Shujaat Ali Khan, J: - Succinctly, on 01.12.2014, Mst. 
Bashiran Bibi (predecessor-in-interest the respondents No.1 to 
3) and Mst. Zohran Bibi (respondent No.4) filed suit against 
legal heirs of their brother Abdul Aziz, seeking declaration to 
the effect that Gift Mutation No.708 (suit mutation), attested 
on 21.01.1987, in respect of property measuring 42-Kanals & 
14-Marlas falling in Khata Nos.27/28, Village Kalian, Tehsil 
Kasur, was result of forgery and fraud, thus, was liable to be 
cancelled and inconsequential upon their rights. The said suit 
was contested by the present petitioners by filing contesting 
written statements inter-alia with the averments that as a matter 
of fact, the land, subject matter of the mutation, was transferred 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--2-- 
in their names as a result of sale thus the same was not open to 
attack. The learned Civil Judge, Kasur (the trial court), out of 
divergent pleadings of the parties, framed following Issues:- 
i. 
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the decree of the 
suit as prayed for? OPP 
ii. 
Whether the plaintiff has got no cause of action to 
institute the present suit? OPD 
iii. 
Whether the present suit is not maintainable in its 
present form? OPD 
iv. 
Whether the present suit is false, frivolous and 
vexatious, hence, liable to be dismissed? OPD 
v. 
Relief. 
 
After recording of evidence and hearing respective arguments 
of the parties, the learned Trial Court dismissed the suit vide 
judgment and decree, dated 01.12.2014, against which the 
respondents filed an appeal which was accepted by the learned 
Additional District Judge, Kasur (the learned Appellate 
Court), vide judgment and decree, dated 17.01.2017; hence this 
petition.  
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that while 
reversing the findings of the learned Trial Court, the learned 
Appellate Court has not given any cogent reason; that since the 
attesting witnesses of the suit mutation were no more alive, the 
petitioners were not bound to produce them in terms of Articles 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--3-- 
17 and 79 of Qanoon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 rather they were 
supposed to fulfil the condition(s) stipulated under Article 82 of 
Qanoon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 and when the petitioners 
discharged their onus under the said provision, the learned 
Appellate Court was not justified to accept the appeal of the 
respondents merely on the ground that the petitioners failed to 
produce the marginal witnesses of the suit mutation; that 
according to Order VII rule 1 CPC, a party is entitled to 
produce documents mentioned in the list of reliance and if any 
other document is to be produced, the party concerned can do 
so with permission of the court only but while observing that 
the petitioners failed to produce copy of order, dated 
11.06.1985, passed by the Assistant Commissioner, Kasur, 
learned Appellate Court omitted to note that the petitioners filed 
application before the learned Trial Court with the prayer to 
summon record relating to the said order but the said 
application was dismissed by the learned Trial Court; that the 
appeal being continuation of the original suit, the learned 
Appellate Court could conveniently summon the record relating 
to the aforesaid order of the Assistant Commissioner or to 
remand the matter to the learned Trial Court for decision afresh 
but it failed to exercise the jurisdiction, vested in it, hence, the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--4-- 
impugned decision is not sustainable; that the petitioners 
discharged their onus by producing relevant witnesses but not a 
single word has been mentioned by the learned Appellate Court 
about their testimony; that the learned Appellate Court failed to 
appreciate that it was not a simple matter of fraud with the 
women folk rather after transfer of inheritance in the name of 
the donors, they alienated the property in favour of the 
petitioners, thus, they were supposed to challenge the same 
maximum within six years as mandated under Article 120 of the 
Limitation Act, 1908; that the learned Appellate Court has held 
the suit mutation as void ab-initio without appreciating that 
there is hell of difference between a void and voidable 
transaction; that the learned Appellate Court failed to note that 
since the parties were residing in the same village, it was not 
believe-able that the respondents were not aware about the 
attestation of the mutation in favour of the petitioners; that the 
respondents moved an application for comparison of thumb 
impressions of Mst. Bashiran Bibi and Mst. Zohran Bibi 
(donors) on the suit mutation but without deciding the said 
application, the learned Appellate Court proceeded to decide 
the main appeal; that the Issues framed by the learned Trial 
Court were not according to the pleadings of the parties, thus 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--5-- 
the controversy between them was not decided in its true 
perspective; that the learned Appellate Court failed to 
appreciate that the suit was not properly valued for the purpose 
of jurisdiction and court-fee; that since serious allegations were 
levelled against the revenue authorities, the suit of the 
respondents was not proceed-able without impleading them as a 
party; that as the documentary evidence was produced by the 
respondents during the statement of their counsel, the same 
could not be read while deciding the lis between the parties; 
that one of the witnesses, namely, Jagmaal was died, as a result, 
his son was produced as a secondary evidence who verified the 
thumb impression of his father on the suit mutation; that the 
learned Appellate Court omitted to note that the decision of the 
Assistant Commissioner, Kasur was brought on record as Mark-
A and that in fact, the respondents filed suit after seventeen 
years of attestation of mutation due to familial disputes. Relies 
on Rustam and others v. Jehangir (deceased) through L.Rs 
(2023 SCMR 730), Mst. Akhtar Sultana v. Major Retd. 
Muzaffar Khan Malik through his legal heirs and others (PLD 
2021 SC 715), Sikandar Hayat and another v. Sughran Bibi 
and 6 others (2020 SCMR 214), Mian Zafar Ali and another v. 
Mian Khursheed Ali (2020 SCMR 291), Sakhi Jan and others 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--6-- 
v. Shah Nawaz and another (2020 SCMR 832),  Muhammad 
Azam v. Muhammad Abdullah through L.Rs. (2009 SCMR 
326), Mst. Imtiaz Begum v. Mst. Sultan Jan and others (2008 
SCMR 1259), Mst. Rasheeda Bibi and others v. Mukhtar 
Ahmad and others (2008 SCMR 1384), Province of Punjab 
through District Collector, Jhang and another v. Allah Bakhsh 
and others (2024 CLC 1193), Khawaja Javed Mehmood v. 
Punjab Small Industries Corporation through Regional 
Director, Rawalpindi and 2 others (2024 CLC 1503), 
Shehwaar and 2 others v. Muhammad Riaz and others (2018 
YLR 1938), Muhammad Asia Begum and 2 others v. 
Muhammad Alam and 3 others (2015 CLC 54), Muhammad 
Zamin Mian and 4 others v. Shamshad and 16 others (2015 
MLD 1384) and Shah Bahadar through Legal Heirs v. Sherin 
Bahadar and others (2014 YLR 1855) and PLD 1965 Dhaka 
65). 
3. 
Learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the respondents, 
while defending the impugned judgment and decree, submits 
that it was optional for the learned Appellate Court either to 
accede to the request of the respondents regarding expert 
opinion and if the learned Appellate Court did not decide the 
application of the respondents, the presumption is that it was 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--7-- 
not convinced to refer the matter to the expert for comparison 
of the thumb impression of Mst. Bashiran Bibi and Mst. Zohran 
Bibi; that since the opinion of an expert is not binding upon a 
Court of law, non-decision of the application of the respondents 
by the learned Appellate Court is not fatal; that as the 
petitioners were the beneficiaries of the suit mutation, they were 
supposed to get compared the signatures of the afore-referred 
females instead of raising any objection against bona-fide move 
made by the respondents for comparison of the thumb 
impression of the donors; that since the petitioners led evidence 
without raising any objection against framing of Issues, it does 
not lie in their mouth to raise objection regarding non-framing 
of requisite Issue(s) at this stage especially when they did not 
make any move for addition, deletion or modification of the 
Issue(s) framed by the learned trial court; that fraudulent 
conduct of the petitioners is evinced from the fact that though 
Muhammad Hussain, predecessor-in-interest of the parties, died 
on 19.07.1980, but the petitioners succeeded to get entered 
mutation of gift on 13.07.1980 and when they failed in their 
nefarious design, they made another attempt and got registered 
mutation No.704 but their said attempt also went abortive as the 
same was cancelled on 31.03.1986; that when the petitioners 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--8-- 
took the plea that the transaction between the parties was not a 
gift rather it was a sale, it amounted to admission on their part 
that there was no gift, thus, the respondents were not supposed 
to prove anything; that while filing written statement in the suit, 
filed by the respondents, the petitioners tried to get declaration 
from the learned trial court that the transaction in their favour 
was a sale; that Tehsildar (PW-2) stated in his evidence that he 
attested the mutation on the basis of order, dated 11.06.1985, 
passed by the Assistant Commissioner, Kasur but the said order 
was never produced either before learned Trial Court or before 
learned Appellate Court; that if adverse inference is to be drawn 
against the respondents on the ground that they got exhibited 
documents during statement of their counsel, then the 
petitioners have not better case as they also produced all 
documentary evidence during the statement of their counsel; 
that sluggish attitude of the petitioners is established from the 
fact that though after dismissal of their application regarding 
summoning of record relating to order, dated 11.06.1985, 
passed by the Assistant Commissioner, Kasur, the suit remained 
pending for more than two years but they did not bother to 
challenge the decision of the learned trial court before any 
higher forum in appropriate proceedings; that even if the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--9-- 
application of the petitioners for summoning of a record 
relating to order, dated 11.06.1985, passed by the Assistant 
Commissioner, Kasur, was dismissed, the petitioners could 
discharge their onus by producing certified copy of the said 
order; that when Tehsildar (PW-2) admitted that he did not 
ensure identification of the donors through available modes, 
including their national identity cards, the stance of the 
respondents that the petitioners managed attestation of suit 
mutation by producing other women, stands proved; that 
statement of Tehsildar (PW-2) that he attested the suit mutation 
in the village was negated by the witnesses produced by the 
petitioners-defendants; that during arguments, learned counsel 
for the petitioners tried to show that DW-3 appeared on behalf 
of his late father as secondary evidence but as a matter of fact, 
the said witness appeared in his independent capacity; that since 
age of DW-3 at the time of attestation of mutation was 10/11 
years, he could not be a competent witness to attest the contents 
of a document; that if transaction between the parties is 
considered as sale, as alleged by the petitioners, even then they 
having failed to prove the necessary ingredients of an oral sale, 
are not entitled to any relief; that mala-fide on the part of the 
petitioners is evident from the fact that they willfully did not 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--10-- 
produce copy of Daily Diary Register of the Patwari, which 
was used as an edifice for the attestation of the suit mutation 
rather the same was brought on record by the respondents; that 
as per Section 18 of the of the Limitation Act, 1908, in matters 
where fraud is alleged, the period of limitation starts from the 
date of knowledge of aggrieved party, thus, the suit of the 
respondents could not be held barred by the law of limitation at 
the whims of the petitioners; that the scope of revisional 
jurisdiction of this Court, being narrow in nature, should be 
confined to any jurisdictional defect on the part of the learned 
Appellate Court whereas in the matter in hand though the 
learned counsel for the petitioners addressed the Court at length 
but failed to point out any material illegality justifying 
interference by this Court in exercise of its revisional 
jurisdiction; that if one of the marginal witnesses was died the 
petitioners were supposed to produce the available witnesses 
but non-production of Muhammad Siddique, one of the 
marginal witnesses, strengthens the plea of the respondents that 
the said witness was not ready to support the untenable claim of 
the petitioners; that Muhammad Boota was produced by the 
respondents but the petitioners did not bother to cross-examine 
by declaring him hostile just for the reason that they did not 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--11-- 
want to get unveiled the truth; that a transaction executed prior 
to promulgation of the Qanoon-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 is not 
required to be proved under the provisions of the said Order 
rather the same is to be proved in terms of the Evidence Act, 
1872 and that the petitioners could only be allowed to produce 
secondary evidence in the event they proved the death of the 
marginal witnesses by producing their death certificates. Relies 
on Saadat Khan and others v. Shahid-ur-Rehman and others 
(PLD 2023 SC 362), Muhammad Nawaz and others v. Sakina 
Bibi and others (2020 SCMR 1021), Muhammad Iqbal v. 
Mehboob Alam (2015 SCMR 21), Noor Muhammad and others 
v. Mst. Azmat-e-Bibi (2012 SCMR 1373), G.R. Syed v. 
Muhammad Afzaal (PLD 2007 Lahore 93) and Baqar v. Allah 
Ditta and others (2003 SCMR 780).  
4. 
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and 
scanning the documents, appended with this petition, in 
particular, the written statement, filed on behalf of the 
petitioners-defendants, I have noted that though they raised 
specific objection against maintainability of the suit vis-à-vis 
limitation but while casting Issues, the learned Trial Court did 
not frame specific Issue on the said point. Though learned 
counsel for the respondents has tried to fill in the said lacuna by 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--12-- 
submitting that when the parties adduced evidence without any 
objection against framing of Issue(s) and both the courts below 
discussed the said limb, no interference is permissible in these 
proceedings on the ground that no specific Issue was framed in 
respect of limitation. In this regard, I am of the view that Order 
XIV CPC casts heavy duty upon the court to firstly determine 
points of dispute between the parties and then to move for 
recording their evidence. It is of common knowledge that the 
parties are supposed to lead evidence to support or oppose a 
fact put before them in the shape of formal Issues but in 
absence of material Issue on a particular point, it cannot be 
believed that the party concerned was aware about the exact 
nature of the dispute regarding which he had to lead evidence. 
Reliance in this regard is placed on Haji Farman Ullah v. Latif-
Ur-Rehman (2015 SCMR 1708) wherein the Apex Court of the 
country while dealing with the repercussions of non-framing of 
a material Issue in line with the pleadings of the parties, has 
inter-alia held as under:- 
“4.*****It may be pertinent to mention here that the 
purpose of framing issues in a civil litigation is that the 
parties must know the crucial and critical factual and 
legal aspects of the case which they are required in law 
to prove or disprove through evidence in order to 
succeed in the matter on facts and also the points of law. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--13-- 
 
5.***** It is postulated in the C.P.C. that in normal 
course for the determination of a civil lis, after the plaint 
has been filed, the written statement must be called for, 
issues should be framed on the basis of the pleadings of 
the parties and the parties must be enabled to lead 
evidence according to the onus placed upon them and it 
is only thereafter while hearing the argument in terms of 
Order XX, Rule 1 that judgment should be pronounced by 
the courts (note however this part of the judgment may 
not be construed to apply where plaint can be rejected 
under the law or summary dismissal of suit is permissible 
under any special law or C.P.C.). All these aspects are 
conspicuously missing in the present case. Resultantly we 
allow this appeal and set aside the judgments of the 
courts below. The suit of the appellant is revived and the 
matter is remanded to the trial court for decision in 
accordance with law after requiring the written statement 
from the respondent.” 
If the omission on the part of the learned Trial Court as well as 
learned Appellate Court in respect of non-framing of Issue, 
concerning limitation, is considered in the light of the above 
quoted judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, there leaves no 
ambiguity that the said flaw, having important bearing upon the 
outcome of the lis between the parties, cannot be let unnoticed.  
5. 
A perusal of the appeal, filed by the respondents shows 
that they inter-alia took the ground that Issues were not 
properly framed. Reference in this regard can be made to the 
following grounds, taken by them in their appeal:- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--14-- 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--15-- 
In presence of such unequivocal stance of the respondents that 
the Issues were not properly framed, the insistence of the 
learned counsel for the respondents that since the controversy 
between the parties was decided by the learned Appellate Court 
in line with the pleadings thus framing of Issues at this stage is 
irrelevant, is not justified. The appeal being the continuation of 
the original suit, the learned Appellate Court enjoys the same 
powers as that of the trial court and if the respondents 
themselves agitated that the Issues were not properly framed the 
learned Appellate Court was supposed to take the said point 
seriously but a perusal of the impugned judgment & decree 
rendered by learned Appellate Court shows that the said point 
has even not been touched. 
6. 
While addressing the Court, learned counsel for the 
respondents, repeatedly argued that since the petitioners 
themselves admitted that no gift was executed in their favour 
rather it was a sale, it amounted to admission on their part that 
no gift was made in their favour. Perhaps, learned counsel for 
the respondents has raised the plea, under discussion, in 
oblivion of the fact that the learned Trial Court did not frame 
specific Issue in that regard and without giving the opportunity 
to the parties to establish their rival claims it cannot be believed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--16-- 
that the learned Appellate Court decided the controversy 
between the parties in line with the facts of the case and the law 
applicable thereto.  
7. 
During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the 
petitioners presented attested copy of the order sheet of the 
learned Appellate Court. A perusal of the same shows that 
alongwith the appeal the respondents filed application for 
comparison of the thumb impressions of Mst. Bashiran Bibi and 
Mst. Zohran Bibi (donors) on the suit mutation, factum whereof 
was duly incorporated in the corresponding interim order, dated 
26.01.2015 which, for facility of reference, is imaged below:-
 
 Admittedly, afore-referred miscellaneous application was not 
decided by the learned Appellate Court before decision in the 
main appeal. It is well established by now that prior to deciding 
the main lis, a court or forum is bound to decide the 
miscellaneous application(s). If any case-law is required, 
reference can be made to the cases reported as Muhammad 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--17-- 
Umer v. Muhammad Qasim and another (1991 SCMR 1232) 
and Amina Begum and others v. Mehar Ghulam Dastgir (PLD 
1978 SC 220). If inaction on the part of the learned Appellate 
Court towards non-decision of the miscellaneous application is 
seen in the light of the afore-referred judgments of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court, it becomes crystal clear that the same cannot be 
condoned merely on the ground that the matter has been 
decided in view of the pleadings of the parties. 
8. 
 This Court is cognizant of the fact that it is optional for 
the Court either to accede to the request of a party for expert 
opinion in a matter or not but the said discretion cannot be used 
to permit a forum to decide the main case without taking 
decision on the miscellaneous application. Further, the 
justification given by the learned counsel for the respondents 
for non-decision of the application, filed by his clients for 
comparison of thumb impressions of the donors, does not 
appeal to reason inasmuch as the intention of the Court to 
permit or decline a party to get compared signatures/thumb 
impressions of a person on a document can be gathered from its 
order but inaction on its part to decide a miscellaneous 
application prior to decision in the main case, cannot be used to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--18-- 
believe that the said forum was not willing to refer the matter 
for expert opinion.   
9. 
Another important facet of the matter in hand is that the 
learned Appellate Court has decided the matter against the 
petitioners on the ground that order, dated 11.06.1985, was not 
produced before the court. Firstly, a perusal of the suit mutation 
shows that the factum of said order has duly been incorporated 
in column No.12 thereof and if there was any ambiguity, the 
learned Appellate Court could summon the record from the 
relevant forum as it was equipped with such powers as that of 
the learned Trial Court. Secondly, during the course of 
arguments, learned counsel for the petitioners took specific plea 
that the order, under discussion, was brought on record by the 
petitioners as Mark-A and the said contention of the learned 
counsel for the petitioners was not specifically repelled by the 
learned counsel for the respondents meaning thereby that there 
was no material omission on the part of the petitioners 
justifying acceptance of the appeal filed by the respondents. 
Moreover, no adverse opinion could be formed against the 
petitioners on account of non-production of order, dated 
11.06.1985, passed by the Assistant Commissioner, Kasur, for 
the reason that the application, filed by them, before the learned 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--19-- 
Trial Court seeking permission to summon record relating to 
said order of the Assistant Commissioner, was rejected by the 
said forum. In this backdrop, one thing is clear that the 
controversy between the parties has not been decided by the 
learned Appellate Court in its true perspective.  
10. 
Now coming to the case-law, referred by the learned 
counsel for the respondents, I am of the view that the same is 
inapplicable to peculiar facts and circumstances of the present 
case inasmuch as in the matter of Saadat Khan and others 
(supra) the question mainly revolved around the share of the 
female legal heirs in the legacy left by their predecessor-in-
interest whereas in the case in hand, the case of the petitioners 
is that the donors transferred the land in their favour after 
getting their due share from inheritance. Likewise, in the case 
of Muhammad Nawaz and others (supra) the question in pith 
and substance before the Hon’ble Supreme Court was regarding 
transfer of the land by the father in favour of his sons while 
excluding the daughters whereas in the case in hand, upon death 
of Muhammad Hussain, predecessor-in-interest of parties, his 
inheritance was opened and the donors got their due share, thus 
the said case is also distinguishable. Insofar as cases of 
Muhammad Iqbal, G.R. Syed and Noor Muhammad and others 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--20-- 
(supra) are concerned, suffice it to note that since the matter is 
not being decided by this Court finally rather the same is being 
remanded, the said decisions are irrelevant at this stage rather 
the respondents would be at liberty to refer them during post-
remand proceedings before the learned Appellate Court. As far 
as case of Baqar (supra) is concerned, it is observed that since 
the petitioners have claimed that in fact it was a sale between 
the parties which was couched in the nature of a gift, the said 
case is of no help to the respondents.  
11. 
For what has been discussed above, instead of dilating 
upon the other limbs of the matter lest it may prejudice the case 
of either party, I deem it appropriate to remand the matter to the 
learned Appellate Court. Resultantly, this petition is allowed 
and the judgment and decree, dated 17.01.2017, passed by the 
learned Appellate Court is set aside. Consequently, the appeal, 
filed by the respondents, would be deemed to be pending before 
learned Appellate Court and the same shall be decided afresh 
after framing proper Issue(s), in particular, on the point of 
limitation.   For the purpose, learned Appellate Court would be 
at liberty either to record evidence by itself or refer the matter 
to learned Trial Court after framing requisite Issue. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No.893/2017 
 
 
--21-- 
12. 
Before parting with this judgment, it is observed that 
learned Appellate Court would be at liberty to record statement 
of anybody or to summon record as additional evidence, for just 
decision of the matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
Jamil* 

