      Form No: HCJD/C-121 
 
     ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Case No.          W.P. No. 53726/2019 
 
Nisar Ahmad 
Versus 
Inspector General of Police, etc. 
 
S.No. of order/ 
Proceeding 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge and that of  
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
       
 
 05.11.2024 
Mr. M. Safdar Shaheen Pirzada, Advocate for the 
petitioner assisted by Mr. Nasir Mehmood Ch., Advocate. 
Rana Shamshad Khan, Additional Advocate General, 
Punjab.  
 
Briefly put, the resume of the facts, spelt out in this 
petition, is that pursuant to advertisement got published by 
the Commandant Punjab Constabulary, in Daily Nawa-e-
Waqt, the petitioner being Ex-Army man, applied against 
the post of Head Constable.  Upon conclusion of the 
recruitment process, the petitioner, alongwith others, was 
selected against the aforesaid post, on contract basis for a 
period of five years, vide Appointment Order, dated 
23.12.2006.  Upon completion of satisfactory service, the 
contract period of the petitioner remained extended from 
time to time.  In the year 2013, Government of the Punjab 
introduced a policy regarding regularization of contract 
employees. Thereafter, services of the petitioner were 
terminated vide order, dated 24.12.2014 against which he, 

-2- 
W.P. No.53726/2019 
 
 
alongwith others, filed Writ Petition (No.34339/2014) 
before this Court which was decided through order, dated 
15.05.2015, directing the department to consider his case for 
regularization within sixty days.  Pursuant to aforesaid order 
of this Court, the department took up cases of 1449 police 
personnel and reinstated only 20 out of them.  Being 
dissatisfied with the exclusion of his name from amongst the 
list of reinstated employees, the petitioner filed Writ Petition 
No.4856/2016 which was disposed of through order, dated 
16.04.2018, with the direction to the department for decision 
of the matter relating to regularization of the petitioner 
through Scrutiny Committee.  Pursuant to order, dated 
16.04.2018, passed by this Court in Writ Petition 
(No.4856/2016), the competent authority took up the case of 
the petitioner and rejected his request for reinstatement and 
regularization vide order, dated 07.09.2019; hence, this 
petition. 
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that since 
the petitioner was fully eligible for appointment against the 
post of Head Constable, his request for reinstatement and 
regularization of his services could not be turned down 
especially in the light of documents brought on record by 
him through Miscellaneous Application (C.M. No.1/2023); 
that it is clear case of discrimination inasmuch as many 

-3- 
W.P. No.53726/2019 
 
 
other similarly placed persons, recruited from amongst Ex-
Army men, have been reinstated and regularized but request 
of the petitioner was turn down on the basis of untenable 
grounds; that rule 18 of the Punjab Civil Servants 
(Appointment & Conditions of Service) Rules, 1974, 
mandates that eligibility of a person to hold a post can only 
be determined at the time of initial induction in service and 
subsequently the department cannot be allowed to re-
adjudge the suitability of said person for any future service 
prospect; that since the petitioner was inducted in service on 
the basis of his meritorious service in Pakistan Army, his 
eligibility/suitability could not be doubted by the Police 
department; that according to Rule 12.1, Chapter-XII of the 
Police Rules, 1934, even a Head Constable can be appointed 
directly; that this Court through judgment, dated 25.01.2019, 
while accepting Writ Petition (No.23900/2016) ordered for 
reinstatement of terminated constables but no reason to 
single out the case of the petitioner has been given in the 
impugned order and that the petitioner would be satisfied if 
his matter is referred to the competent authority for redressal 
of his grievance. 
3. 
Learned Law Officer, while opposing the submissions 
made by learned counsel for the petitioner and defending the 
order impugned in this petition, states that since the 

-4- 
W.P. No.53726/2019 
 
 
petitioners, 
in 
the 
referred 
case 
(Writ 
Petition 
No.23900/2016), were constables, the case of the petitioner 
being Head Constable cannot be considered at par with 
them; that according to Article 7(3) of the Police Order, 
2002, no direct recruitment can be made against the post of 
Head Constable, hence, the petitioner’s request was rightly 
turn down by the competent authority; that even in the 
advertisement there was no mention of regularization, thus, 
the petitioner cannot seek regularization of his service in 
violation of terms and conditions stipulated in Appointment 
Order; that since the petitioner’s contract expired on 
28.12.2014, he has no case for reinstatement or 
regularization of his service and if he has any grievance 
relating to unexpired period of his contract, he could 
approach the Civil Court in the light of judgment reported as 
Federation of Pakistan v. Muhammad Azam Chattha (2013 
SCMR 120) and that if the petitioner is of the view that 
there is any left out grievance, he can approach the relevant 
forum for redressal of his grievance.  
4. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner, while exercising 
his right of rebuttal, submits that since no exception clause 
in the Policy, promulgated by the government for 
regularization of contract employees in the year 2013, has 
been mentioned the respondents cannot be allowed to 

-5- 
W.P. No.53726/2019 
 
 
introduce the same of their own; that since there is no 
embargo in the Police Order, 2002 against recruitment for 
the post of Head Constable, the same cannot be allowed to 
be introduced at the whims of the respondents and that if the 
Police Order, 2002 does not permit direct recruitment 
against the post of Head Constable as to how the same was 
included in the advertisement. In support of his contentions, 
learned counsel has referred to following cases in the body 
of the petition I.A. Sharwani and others v. Government of 
Pakistan through Secretary, Finance Division, Islamabad 
and others (1991 SCMR 1041), Pakistan through Ministry 
of Finance v. Muhammad Himayatullah Farukhi (PLD 1969 
SC 407) and an unreported judgment, dated 25.01.2019, 
rendered by this Court in W.P. No.23900/2016, titled as 
Muhammad Riaz etc. v. Province of Punjab etc. 
5. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties in addition 
to going through the documents appended with this petition 
and those forming part of the report and parawise comments, 
submitted on the behalf of the respondents, in addition to 
case law cited at bar. 
6. 
A perusal of the file shows that the entire case of the 
petitioner hinges upon the policy of the government of the 
Punjab, relating to regularization of contract employees 

-6- 
W.P. No.53726/2019 
 
 
which 
was 
circulated 
through 
Notification 
bearing 
No.DS(O&M)S&GAD)5-3/2013, dated 01.03.2013.  In my 
humble opinion, for just decision of the matter in hand and 
to appreciate that as to whether the case of the petitioner is 
covered under the said policy or not, perusal of the policy, 
under discussion, is of paramount consideration, therefore, 
the same, for convenience of reference, is imaged below:- 

-7- 
W.P. No.53726/2019 
 
 
According to the afore-imaged Notification, the Terms of 
References (TORs) for Scrutiny Committee constituted 

-8- 
W.P. No.53726/2019 
 
 
under the said Policy were inter-alia to verify as to whether 
contract appointments were made in accordance with the 
provisions of the Service Rules regarding age limit, 
qualification and experience.  Insofar as the case in hand is 
concerned, the relevant rules are Police Rules, 1934 and 
Police Order, 2002. Article 7 of the Police Order, 2002 deals 
with constitution of Police, which for convenience of 
reference is reproduced here under:- 
“7.   Constitution of police.–  
 
(1) The police establishment for each general 
police area shall consist of such numbers in the 
senior 
and 
junior 
ranks 
and 
have 
such 
organization as the Government may from time to 
time determine. 
 
(2)  The recruitment criteria, pay and allowances 
and all other conditions of service of the police 
shall be such as the Government may from time to 
time determine. 
 
(3)  The recruitment in the police other than 
ministerial and specialist cadres shall be in the 
rank of Constable, Sub-Inspector and Assistant 
Superintendent of Police. 
 
(3a)   The selection for direct recruitment in the 
rank of Constable shall be made on the basis of 
district of domicile. 
 
(3b)   The selection for direct recruitment in the 
rank of Sub-Inspector shall be made through 
Punjab Public Service Commission on the basis of 
police region in which district of domicile of the 
candidate is located and shall not exceed fifty 
percent of total posts in the rank of Sub-Inspector. 
 
      (3c) 
Subject to the rules– 
 

-9- 
W.P. No.53726/2019 
 
 
(a)   twenty-five percent of the quota 
reserved for departmental promotion 
to the rank of Sub-Inspector shall be 
filled through selection-on-merit by 
Punjab Public Service Commission 
from amongst police officers holding 
bachelor’s degree in the rank of Head 
Constable 
and 
Assistant 
Sub-
Inspector; and 
 
(b)   twenty-five percent departmental 
promotions to the rank of Assistant 
Sub-Inspector shall be made through 
selection-on-merit by Punjab Public 
Service Commission from amongst 
police officers holding bachelor’s 
degree in the rank of Constable and 
Head Constable. 
 
(4)  The recruitment in the rank of Assistant 
Superintendent of Police shall be through the 
Federal Public Service Commission on all 
Pakistan basis. 
 
(5). 
* * * * * (omitted) 
 
(6).  Every police officer while on police duty shall 
have all the powers and privileges of a police 
officer throughout Pakistan and be liable to serve 
at any time in any branch, division, bureau and 
section.” (emphasis provided) 
 
According to Sub-Section 3 supra, direct recruitment in 
police department, other than ministerial and specialist 
cadres, can be made against the ranks of Constable, 
Assistant Sub-Inspector and Assistant Superintendent of 
Police and there is no mention of the post of Head Constable 
in the said provision, meaning thereby that the post of Head 
Constable is not meant for direct recruitment. Moreover, 
according to rule 12.10 of Police Rules, 1934 Chapter XII, 

-10- 
W.P. No.53726/2019 
 
 
Head Constables are to be appointed by promotion from 
selection grade constables. Further, according to Article 186 
of the Police Order, 2002, the police functioning in the 
province of Punjab and Islamabad territory, immediately 
before the commencement of this Order, shall on such 
commencement be deemed to be police constituted under 
this Order, thus, reliance of the petitioner on Rule 12.1 ibid 
is of no help to the petitioner.  
7. 
While responding to the objection raised by the 
learned Law Officer against appointment of the petitioner 
against the post of Head Constable, learned counsel for the 
petitioner, has referred to the advertisement pursuant 
whereto the petitioner alongwith others were selected 
through Appointment Order, dated 23.12.2006, to argue that 
if no appointment against the post of Head Constable could 
be made as to how the same was mentioned in the said 
advertisement. In my humble estimation, the advertisement, 
being referred by the learned counsel for the petitioner, is 
silent about the law/policy/rules/regulations under which the 
same was issued, meaning thereby that the recruitment from 
amongst the Ex-Army men were made purely on contract 
basis to cope with the law and order situation prevalent at 
that time. According to afore-imaged Notification, dated 
01.03.2013, the Scrutiny Committee was given the task to 

-11- 
W.P. No.53726/2019 
 
 
verify as to whether contract appointments were made 
according to the Contract Policy, 2004.  Had the petitioner 
been appointed under the Contract Policy, 2004, the position 
might had been different, thus, reliance of learned counsel 
for the petitioner on the advertisement in question is of little 
importance. 
8. 
Now taking up the plea of the learned counsel for the 
petitioner that according to Rule 12.1 Chapter XII of Police 
Rules, 1934, post of Head Constable can be filled in directly, 
I am of the view that though the referred rules deal with 
different categories of employees in the police, alongwith 
corresponding competent authority but the same does not 
enshrine that direct recruitment against the post of Head 
Constable is permissible.  Moreover, rule 12.10 ibid being 
latter in time, enjoys precedence over the rule being referred 
by the learned counsel for the petitioner, thus the same does 
not lend any help to his client. 
9. 
While addressing the Court, learned counsel for the 
petitioner vehemently agitated the point of discrimination 
and with a view to fortify his contention, learned counsel 
referred to judgment, dated 25.01.2019, passed by this Court 
in Writ Petition No.23900/2016.  To appreciate the point 
urged by learned counsel for the petitioner, I have gone 

-12- 
W.P. No.53726/2019 
 
 
through the referred judgment which on the face of it is quite 
distinguishable from the present case inasmuch as the 
petitioners in the said matter being Ex-Army personnel, 
were appointed against the post of Constables in the Punjab 
Police whereas the petitioner in the instant petition joined as 
Head Constable, thus, he cannot be allowed to take premium 
of the afore-referred judgment. 
10. 
It is admitted position that lastly the contract of the 
petitioner was terminated vide order, dated 24.12.2014, upon 
completion of last extended period of contract.  Though the 
petitioner had been pursuing his matter before different 
forums, including this Court, but failed to establish his right.  
Even today, learned counsel for the petitioner has not been 
able to refer to any identical case or decision to establish that 
a Head Constable, directly appointed, is eligible for 
regularization rather while showing totally professional 
approach, learned counsel for the petitioner frankly 
conceded that till date no Head Constable, appointed under 
the advertisement, subject matter of this petition, has ever 
been regularized. In this backdrop, the request of the 
petitioner for instatement and regularization cannot be given 
any weightage especially when he was allowed to complete 
his extended period of contract without any interruption. 

-13- 
W.P. No.53726/2019 
 
 
11. 
Now taking up the plea of learned counsel for the 
petitioner that since eligibility of the petitioner to hold the 
post of Head Constable was determined by the relevant 
authority at the time of his induction in service, the 
departmental authorities could not be allowed to re-assess 
him in that regard.  In this regard, I am of the view that 
perhaps learned counsel for the petitioner has raised said 
plea in oblivion of the contents of the regularization policy 
being pressed into service by the petitioner seeking his 
reinstatement and regularization.  At the cost of repetition, it 
is observed that when the Scrutiny Committee was assigned 
the role to verify the appointment of a contract employee 
with specific reference to eligibility criteria, in particular, 
Contract Policy, 2004, the petitioner has no cheeks to raise 
objection against the scrutiny of the antecedents of the 
petitioner by the Scrutiny Committee. 
12. 
It is well entrenched by now that extraordinary 
constitutional jurisdiction, vested in this Court under Article 
199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973, can be used in favour of a person, whose right is being 
withheld by the executive despite the fact that same has been 
established under the relevant law. As far as, the case in 
hand is concerned, undeniably, neither the Police Rules, 
1934 nor the Police Order, 2002 permits for direct 

-14- 
W.P. No.53726/2019 
 
 
recruitment against the post of Head Constable rather the 
same is meant for promotion from amongst the Constables 
who are enlisted in List A and B, thus it is not fit case for 
exercise of extraordinary constitutional jurisdiction by this 
Court. 
13. 
Now coming to the case-law referred in body of the 
petition, I am of the view that the same is inapplicable to the 
peculiar facts and circumstances of the case in hand 
inasmuch in none of the referred cases, it was declared that 
any person, who was appointed against the relevant rules, is 
entitled for regularization of his service.  
14. 
For what has been discussed above, I see no force in 
this petition which is accordingly dismissed with the 
observation that if the petitioner feels that any of his 
grievance has been left un-attended, he would be at liberty to 
agitate his grievance before the relevant forum.  No order as 
to costs. 
 
 
 
 
 
            (Shujaat Ali Khan) 
 
     
                      
                Judge  
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
 
 
 
   Judge 
M.Tahir* 
 

