StereoHCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.28022 of 2023 
 
 
 
Packages Limited     
Versus 
Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal & another  
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
Date of hearing: 30.09.2024. 
 
Petitioner by: 
Barrister Rafay Altaf, Advocate. 
 
Respondent 
No.2 by: 
Ch. Imran Younas Goraya, Advocate. 
 
 
  
 
Shujaat Ali Khan, J: - Shorn of unnecessary details, the 
facts forming factual canvass of this petition are that while 
serving as Operator with the petitioner-company, disciplinary 
proceedings 
were 
initiated 
against 
Muhammad 
Iqbal 
(respondent No.2) on the basis of a complaint, referred by the 
Production Engineer, BUCP-Conversion, Packages Limited, 
pursuant to Show Cause Notice/Suspension Order, dated 
05.11.2015. 
Upon 
conclusion 
of 
inquiry 
proceedings, 
respondent No.2 was dismissed from service vide Letter of 
Dismissal, dated 08.12.2015, issued by the Industrial 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--2-- 
Relations/Factory Manager, Packages Limited. Being aggrieved 
of his dismissal from service, respondent No.2 after serving 
Grievance Notice upon the petitioner-company, filed Grievance 
Petition under Section 33 of the Punjab Industrial Relations 
Act, 2010 (hereinafter to be referred as (“PIRA 2010”) before 
the Punjab Labour Court No.2, Lahore (“the Labour Court”) 
which was dismissed vide judgment, dated 02.02.2022 against 
which respondent No.2 filed an appeal, which was accepted by 
the Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal, Lahore (“PLAT”) 
through judgment, dated 15.03.2023; hence this petition.  
2. 
The submissions made by learned counsel for the 
petitioner-company can be summed up in the words that though 
while filing of reply to the Grievance Petition the petitioner-
company raised objection qua jurisdiction of the Labour Court 
on the premise that respondent No.2 being not a workman, 
neither the provisions of the Industrial and Commercial 
Employment (Standing Orders) Ordinance, 1968 (“the 
Ordinance 1968”) nor those of PIRA, 2010 were attracted but 
both the labour fora below did not attend the said important 
limb of the matter; that PLAT omitted to note that while filing 
reply to the Show Cause Notice in addition to other defences, 
respondent No.2 also alleged victimization at the hand of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--3-- 
employer but he did not incorporate the said fact either in the 
Grievance Notice or in the Grievance Petition, thus mala-fide 
on his part was floating on the surface; that despite availing 
three opportunities, respondent No.2 failed to hire services of a 
co-worker to facilitate him during inquiry, meaning thereby that 
allegations against him were established beyond any shadow of 
doubt; that respondent No.2 was employee of the petitioner-
company but he wanted to nominate a person from Bullehay 
Shah Paper Mills though it was a sister-concern of the 
petitioner-company but it had nothing to do with the affairs of 
the petitioner-company, which fact also suggests that nobody 
from the petitioner-company was ready to support him; that 
respondent No.2 contented with his solitary assertion in his 
affidavit, submitted in evidence, that he was a workman which 
was not sufficient to establish said fact; that when the 
petitioner-company denied the status of respondent No.2 as 
workman, he was bound to establish that he falls within such 
category to maintain the proceedings before the fora below; that 
while rendering the impugned judgment, PLAT failed to 
appreciate that neither the Labour Court nor PLAT nor even 
this Court can substitute the findings of the Inquiry Committee; 
that when an employee is found guilty of misconduct, the 
authority to award punishment lies with the Competent 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--4-- 
Authority but said fact escaped notice of PLAT; that a cursory 
survey of the appeal, filed by respondent No.2, before the 
PLAT shows that it has been couched as a service appeal, thus, 
the PLAT was not obliged to upset the findings of the Labour 
Court which were based on true appreciation of evidence; that 
the findings of the PLAT, being illusionary in nature, are not 
sustainable and that instead of designation the duties being 
performed by a person plays pivotal role towards determination 
of his status as a workman and respondent No.2 being Incharge 
of a Unit did not fall within the category of a workman.  
3. 
Learned counsel, appearing on behalf of respondent 
No.2, while defending the impugned judgment, passed by the 
PLAT, states that in the basic complaint, the date and time of 
alleged misconduct on the part of respondent No.2 has not been 
mentioned, thus the same could not be used as triggering point 
for initiation of disciplinary proceedings against respondent 
No.2; that as a matter of fact, respondent No.2 alongwith other 
workers were summoned by the Production Engineer to know 
their complaints and uplifting all the productions and during 
said meeting, many others alongwith respondent No.2 
highlighted certain problems, being faced by them in relation to 
uplifting the production but initiation of disciplinary 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--5-- 
proceedings against respondent No.2 alone stands proof of the 
fact that he was not only discriminated but was also made 
scapegoat for no fault on his part; that when PW-1 and PW-2 
admitted that respondent No.2 had been performing duties of 
box making, his status as workman was admitted by the 
witnesses, produced by the petitioner-company; that the 
judgments, referred by the petitioner-company in the body of 
the petition reported as Muslim Commercial Bank Ltd. through 
General Attorney and another v. Amir Hussain and another  
(1996 SCMR 464) and Crescent Jute Products Ltd. Jaranwala 
v. Muhammad Yaqub etc. (PLD 1978 SC 207) go against the 
petitioner-company; that Sections 33(7) and 47(3) of PIRA, 
2010 empower the Labour Court as well as the PLAT to decide 
a matter comprehensively, thus, no illegality has been 
committed by the PLAT while reversing the findings of the 
Labour Court; that bonafide of respondent No.2 is evident from 
the fact that he not only claimed himself to be a workman in the 
Grievance Notice but also in the Grievance Petition, thus, the 
onus heavily lied on the petitioner-company to establish 
otherwise but when it failed to do so, no material illegality has 
been committed by the fora below while treating respondent 
No.2 as a workman; that not only in the reply, submitted by the 
petitioner-company to the Grievance Petition, it was admitted 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--6-- 
that respondent No.2 was workman but also initiation of 
proceedings against him under the provisions of the Ordinance, 
1968 and ultimate passing of penultimate order under the said 
enactment speaks volumes about the fact that respondent No.2 
was rightly treated as a workman; that Standing Order 15 of the 
Ordinance, 1968 only applies to a workman and in case the 
explanation being given by learned counsel for the petitioner-
company is accepted as correct, the proceedings conducted 
against respondent No.2 would become void ab-initio; that 
issuance of the suspension order of respondent No.2 under the 
provisions of the Ordinance 1968 also stands proof of the fact 
that he was a workman; that when respondent No.2 not only 
alleged victimization at the hands of the employer in the 
Grievance Notice but also in the Grievance Petition, the plea of 
learned counsel for the petitioner-company that he omitted the 
allegation of victimization in the said documents goes against 
the record; that closure of rights of respondent No.2 to appoint 
a person as co-worker; to cross-examine the PWs and to make 
statement on a single date, speaks volumes about undue haste 
on the part of the Inquiry Officer; that at the most, the Inquiry 
Officer could close the right of respondent No.2 to cross-
examine or to appoint any person as a co-worker but he could 
not deprive respondent No.2 of his right to make statement in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--7-- 
support of his case; that during evidence, the witnesses 
produced by the petitioner-company, were confronted with the 
question as to whether respondent No.2 was ever proceeded 
against during his service spreading over 23 years, the 
witnesses showed their inability to answer the said query; that 
the recitals of the dismissal order are not complied with the 
provisions of the Ordinance 1968 and that since the PLAT has 
given details reasons in support of its decision, the same is 
immune from interference by this Court in exercise of its 
constitutional jurisdiction. Relies on The Postmaster General, 
Sindh Province, Karachi and others v. Syed Farhan (2022 
SCMR 1154), Khalid Mehmood v. State Life Insurance 
Corporation of Pakistan and others (2018 SCMR 376), 
Crescent Jute Products Ltd., Jaranwala v. Muhammad Yaqub 
etc. (PLD 1978 SC 207), Bashir Ahmed v. Government of 
Sindh through Secretary, Home Department and 3 others (2003 
PLC (C.S.) 1249) and Muhammad Naeem v. General Tyre and 
Rubber Company of Pakistan and another (2020 PLC 108). 
4. 
While exercising his right of rebuttal, learned counsel for 
the petitioner-company submits that since respondent No.2 has 
not alleged victimization in the Grievance Notice or in the 
Grievance Petition, the arguments advanced by his learned 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--8-- 
counsel are aimed to mislead this Hon’ble Court, thus, the said 
fact goes against him. Adds that when respondent No.2 did not 
clarify as to how he was a workman, his solitary assertion and 
that too in his affidavit, submitted in evidence, could be treated 
as sufficient proof of his status as workman.  In support of his 
contentions, learned counsel has relied upon the cases reported 
as Messrs Pak Telecom Mobile Limited v. Muhammad Atif Bilal 
and 2 others (2024 SCMR 719),   National Bank of Pakistan 
and another v. Anwar Shah and others (2015 SCMR 434), 
Muslim Commercial Bank Ltd. and others v. Muhammad 
Shahid Mumtaz and another (2011 SCMR 1475), National 
Bank of Pakistan v. Punjab Labour Court No.5, Faisalabad and 
2 others (1993 SCMR 672), General Manager, Hotel 
Intercontinental, Lahore and another v. Bashir A. Malik and 
others (PLD 1986 SC 103), Ejaz Ahmad Butt v. Habib Bank 
Ltd and others (1986 SCMR 1262), United Bank Limited and 5 
others v. Raja Ghulam Hussain and 4 others (1999 PLC 106) 
and Pakistan Tobacco Co. Ltd. v. Channa Khan and others 
(1980 PLC 981). 
5. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at 
considerable length and have also gone through the documents, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--9-- 
annexed with this petition, as well as the case-law cited at the 
bar. 
6. 
Firstly taking up the objection raised by learned counsel 
for the petitioner-company that since respondent No.2 was 
Branch Incharge he did not fall within the definition of 
workman, I have noted that there is no cavil with the fact that 
the duties, being performed by a person, are determining factor 
to adjudge as to whether he/she is a workman or not. 
Undeniably, disciplinary proceedings were initiated against 
respondent No.2 for alleged violation of Standing Order 
No.15(3)(a) & (h) of the Ordinance, 1968, which fact can be 
exemplified from the following portion from the Inquiry 
Report: - 
“The above mentioned acts constitute misconduct in 
terms of 15-3(a) and 15-3(h) of the Industrial & 
Commercial Employment (Standing Orders) Ordinance, 
1968. 
15-3(a) willful insubordination or disobedience, whether 
alone or in combination with others, to any lawful and 
reasonable order of a superior. 
15-3(h) Riotous and disorderly behavior during working 
hours at the establishment or any act subversive of 
discipline.”  
 
Further, Standing Order 15 starts with the words that a 
workman may be reprimanded or fined meaning thereby that 
the same is meant for a worker.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--10-- 
7. 
Admittedly, respondent No.2 filed Grievance Petition 
under section 33 of PIRA, 2010. Preamble of said enactment 
shows that the same has inter-alia been enacted to regulate 
relations between employers and workmen. Further, section 
2(xxxi)  of PIRA, 2010, deals with the definition of a worker or 
a workman, which for facility of reference is reproduced here-
in-below:- 
(xxxi) “worker” and “workman” mean a 
person not falling within the definition 
of 
employer 
who 
is 
employed 
(including employment as a supervisor 
or 
as 
an 
apprentice) 
in 
an 
establishment or industry for hire or 
reward either directly or through a 
contractor whether the terms of 
employment be express or implied, 
and, 
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
any 
proceedings under the Act in relation 
to an industrial dispute includes a 
person who has been dismissed, 
discharged, retrenched, laid-off or 
otherwise removed from employment 
in 
connection 
with 
or 
as 
a 
consequence of that dispute or whose 
dismissal, discharge, retrenchment, 
lay-off, or removal has led to that 
dispute but does not include any 
person who is employed mainly in 
managerial 
or 
administrative 
capacity.” 
According to the afore-quoted definition, only those employees 
have been excluded from the category of workmen who have 
been appointed in an establishment in managerial or 
administrative capacity. Insofar as the case in hand is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--11-- 
concerned, the designation of respondent No.2 has been 
mentioned as Operator in the Show Cause Notice, thus, on the 
dint of his designation, neither he can be considered as manager 
or holder of any administrative post. Further, while filing reply 
to the Grievance Petition, the petitioner-company while 
replying to para-3(i) inter-alia averred as under:- 
 
“(i) 
That the petitioner was employed as 
Operator in Packages Limited and by 
virtue of duties being performed by him, 
he 
falls 
within 
the 
definition 
of 
‘Workman’ under the provisions of The 
Industrial and Commercial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Ordinance, 1968 as 
well as the Punjab Industrial Relations 
Act, 20101 and other labour laws.”  
A cursory glance over the stance taken by the petitioner-
company in its reply to the Grievance Petition renders it crystal 
clear that it admitted the status of respondent No.2 as a 
workman, thus, it cannot be allowed to change its stance before 
this Court irrespective of the fact as to whether it challenged the 
findings of the Labour Court whereby he was treated as 
workman. 
8. 
While skimming the documents, appended with this 
petition, in particular statements of PW-1 and PW-2, I have 
noted that both the said witnesses stated in their examination-
in-chief that respondent No.2 had been performing duties of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--12-- 
manual nature, thus the plea of learned counsel for the 
petitioner-company that respondent No.2 did not fall within the 
category of a workman, being contrary to the record, cannot be 
given any weightage.  
9. 
At the cost of repetition, it is observed that right from 
inception of disciplinary proceedings upto issuance of dismissal 
letter of respondent No.2, the petitioner-company itself had 
been relying upon different provisions of the Ordinance 1968. 
Further, the punishments provided under Standing Order 15 of 
the Ordinance 1968 are only meant for a workman and if, as 
argued by learned counsel for the petitioner-company, the same 
was inapplicable to respondent No.2, perhaps, the entire 
proceedings conducted against him would stand nullified. An 
employer cannot be allowed to blow hot and cold in the same 
breath inasmuch as once the status of a person has been 
admitted as workman, the same cannot be allowed to be 
retracted without any change in the nature of his work.  
10. 
Now reverting to the merits of the case, I have noted that 
admittedly the disciplinary proceedings were initiated against 
respondent No.2 on the basis of a complaint, as forwarded by 
the Production Engineer, BUCP-Conversion, Packages Limited, 
which for convenience of reference is imaged here-in-below:- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--13-- 
From the afore-imaged complaint, one thing is clear that the 
meeting was called to impart know-how of the whole system to 
the workers and to discuss their issues and to find out possible 
resolutions. If the contents of the complaint under discussion, 
followed by the Show Cause Notice, are seen in the light of the 
aforesaid fact, there leaves no ambiguity that though respondent 
No.2 agitated certain issues but the same could not be treated as 
misconduct. According to Standing Order 15(3) of the 
Ordinance 1968, following acts and omissions can be treated as 
misconduct:- 
“(a)   wilful insubordination or disobedience, whether 
alone or in combination with others, to any lawful 
and reasonable order of a superior; 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--14-- 
(b)   theft, fraud, or dishonesty in connection with the 
employer’s business or property; 
 
(c)   
wilful damage to or loss of employer’s goods or 
property; 
 
 (d)  taking or giving bribes or any illegal gratification; 
 
 (e)   habitual absence without leave or absence without 
leave for more than ten days; 
 
 (f)   habitual late attendance; 
 
 (g)   habitual breach of any law applicable to the 
establishment; 
 
  (h)   riotous or disorderly behaviour during working 
hours at the establishment or any act subversive of 
discipline; 
 
(i) 
habitual negligence or neglect of work; 
 
  (j)    frequent repetition of any act or omission referred to in 
clause (1); 
 
  (k)   striking work or inciting others to strike in 
contravention of the provisions of any law, or rule 
having the force of law; 
 
   (l)   go-slow.” 
If the allegations levelled against respondent No.2 are adjudged 
in the light of afore-quoted omissions/acts, in my humble 
opinion, none is attracted against him inasmuch as mere an 
attempt to play a leading role amongst the workers, while 
discussing issues, cannot be termed as any of the omissions/acts 
as enumerated above. Likewise, the sarcastically laughing also 
does not constitute an offence amounting to misconduct. Insofar 
as the allegation of resisting against the lawful demand of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--15-- 
management is concerned, admittedly the Production Engineer, 
BUCP-Conversion, 
Packages 
Limited, 
interacted 
with 
respondent No.2 and others on his first day of joining the 
petitioner-company, thus, it cannot be believed that a person, 
who joined a day ago, was able to adjudge the conduct and 
output of a worker having 23 years of blotless service at his 
credit.  
11. 
It is relevant to note that though allegations of willful 
disobedience, riotous and disorderly behaviour were levelled 
against respondent No.2 in the Show Cause Notice but the 
petitioner-company did not produce anything to prove the said 
fact inasmuch as, Hassam Ahmad, PW-1 and Syed Hassan 
Waqar, PW-2 did not utter a word about conduct of respondent 
No.2 during meeting constituting misconduct on his part.  
12. 
A bird’s eye view of the statements of the above 
witnesses shows that PW-1 was not happy over highlighting of 
different problems by respondent No.2, being faced by the 
workers. In my humble opinion, if the management was 
sincere, instead of lynching respondent No.2, it was supposed 
to give sympathetic consideration to the legitimate demands of 
the workers especially in relation to provision of machines to 
meet with the new targets of production but initiation of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--16-- 
disciplinary proceedings just on the basis that respondent No.2 
critically discussed the suggestion of the management, per-se 
speaks volumes about mala-fide conduct of the management of 
the petitioner-company.  
13. 
Undeniably, at the time of initiation of departmental 
proceedings, respondent No.2 had 23 years of service at his 
credit. During proceedings before the Labour Court, Syed 
Imran Adil, RW-1, was posed with specific question as to 
whether respondent No.2 was ever confronted with any 
disciplinary proceedings during his entire service, who instead 
of replying to the said query in a straight forward manner, 
showed his inability to respond said query without consulting 
the record.  
14. 
While addressing the Court, learned counsel for the 
petitioner-company took specific plea that the findings of the 
Inquiry Officer/Committee cannot be substituted by any forum 
including this Court. I am in agreement with the learned 
counsel for the petitioner-company that in ordinary course the 
findings of the Inquiry Officer/Committee cannot be substituted 
but when the same are not based on true appraisal of the 
material on record the same cannot be considered sacrosanct 
rather in such eventuality no forum should feel shy to take care 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--17-- 
of such omission or commission. As far as the case in hand is 
concerned, suffice it to observe that RW-1, during his cross-
examination, admitted that upon completion of inquiry 
proceedings copy of the inquiry report was not given to 
respondent No.2. Further, the said witness also admitted that in 
his findings he used words “financial loss”, however, in 
voluntary portion of said statement the said witness claimed 
that refusal to increase production amounts to financial loss. 
The said inconsistency on the part of the Inquiry Officer  (RW-
1) cannot be let unnoticed as claimed by learned counsel for the 
petitioner-company.  
15. 
It has not been denied by the learned counsel for the 
petitioner-company that during his entire career spreading over 
23 years, respondent No.2 was never confronted with any 
disciplinary proceedings. The said fact depicts that respondent 
No.2 had been performing his duties diligently and without any 
objection from his supervisory officers, thus, imposition of 
harsh penalty of dismissal from service is not justified when 
compared to the peculiar facts and circumstances of present 
case. 
16. 
Though the entire case of the petitioner-company hinges 
upon the fact that respondent No.2 instigated other co-workers 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--18-- 
to desist against the demands of the employer for increase in 
production but none of them was examined in the witness box 
which fact also weakens the case of the petitioner-company. 
Further, the witnesses produced by the petitioner-company 
failed to establish the said allegation. Moreover, PW-1, during 
inquiry proceedings, stated that he felt that respondent No.2 
was instigating the other co-workers meaning thereby that the 
said witness was also not exact as to whether respondent No.2 
was instigating the other participants or not.   
17. 
During hearing, learned counsel for the petitioner-
company vehemently urged that it is upto the competent 
authority to decide about the quantum of penalty to be imposed 
against an employee. In this regard, I do not agree with learned 
counsel for the petitioner-company for the reason that instead of 
choice of the competent authority it is requirement of law that 
penalty should commensurate with gravity of allegation. 
Reliance in this regard is placed on the cases reported as The 
Postmaster General Sindh Province, Karachi and others v. 
Syed Farhan (2022 SCMR 1154), Secretary to Government of 
the Punjab, Food Department, Lahore and another (2007 PLC 
(C.S.) 692) and Government of Punjab v. Shahid Mehmood 
Butt (2006 SCMR 443).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--19-- 
18. 
Admittedly, the findings of the fora below are at variance 
and in such eventuality preference is to be given to the verdict 
of the appellate forum until and unless the same is found to be 
perverse or arbitrary which is not the position in case in hand. 
Reliance in this regard is placed on the case reported as Hakim-
ud-Din through L.Rs and others v. Faiz Bakhsh and others 
(2007 SCMR 870).  
19. 
This Court has no sympathy with respondent No.2 but at 
the same time the action of the petitioner-company dismissing 
him from service cannot be validated especially when the same 
is based on the material which was insufficient to bring home 
the guilt against him. In my humble estimation, the objections 
of respondent No.2, against proposed increase in production 
without fixing the issues being faced by the workers in relation 
to provision of machines etc., were used against him as 
incriminating material which being alien to the provision of the 
Ordinance, 1968 cannot be approved. 
20. 
It is matter of record that during meeting, many others, 
alongwith respondent No.2, voiced reservations against the 
policies of the petitioner-company but initiation of proceedings 
against respondent No.2 alone stands proof of the fact that he 
was discriminated which approach being violative of Article 25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
W.P. No.28022 of  2023 
--20-- 
of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 
cannot be approved. 
21. 
Now coming to the case-law, referred by learned counsel 
for the petitioner-company, I am of the view that the same 
stands distinguished from the fact that not only the petitioner-
company admitted in its reply to the Grievance Petition that 
respondent No.2 was workman but also in the evidence RWs 
admitted that respondent No.2 had been performing duties of 
manual nature. Moreover, initiation of disciplinary proceedings 
under Standing Order No.15 and conclusion thereof under the 
said Standing Order also belies the claim of petitioner-company 
that respondent No.2 was not workman.  
22. 
For what has been discussed above, I see no force in this 
petition which is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
Approved for reporting.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
Jamil* 
 
 

