      Form No: HCJD/C-121 
 
     ORDER SHEET 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
Case No.          W.P. No. 13846/2011 
 
Pakistan Railway, etc. 
Versus 
Abdul Rasheed, etc. 
 
S.No. of order/ 
Proceeding 
Date of order/ 
Proceeding 
Order with signature of Judge and that of  
parties or counsel, where necessary 
 
       
 
 12.12.2024 
Mr. Umer Sharif, Advocate for the petitioners. 
Mr. Tanveer Ahmad Ghumman, Advocate for respondents 
No.1 and 2. 
 
Succinctly, respondents No.1 and 2, alongwith others, 
filed grievance petition before Punjab Labour Court No.I, 
Lahore seeking regularization of their services, however, the 
same was transferred to Punjab Labour Court No.II, Lahore 
(“Labour Court”) pursuant to order dated, 19.08.2004, 
passed by this Court in Transfer Application (No.2/2004). 
Finally, Labour Court dismissed the grievance petition vide 
order, dated 05.09.2005, against which respondents No.1 
and 2 filed Labour Appeal No.306/2005 before this Court 
which was allowed vide order, dated 03.07.2006, and the 
matter was remanded to the Labour Court for decision 
afresh. During post remand proceedings, services of other 
employees, petitioners before the Labour Court, were 
regularized in view of the policy of the Federal Government 
whereas the names of respondents No.1 and 2 were left out.  
In view of regularization of their services, rest of the 

2 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
employees, petitioners before the Labour Court, withdrew 
their grievance petition on 19.04.2008 whereas respondents 
No.1 and 2 filed amended grievance petition on 19.07.2008 
inter alia challenging the advertisement, dated 17.06.2004, 
got issued by the relevant authority for recruitment against 
the posts being held by them and prayed for their 
regularization. The Labour Court accepted the grievance 
petition filed by respondents No.1 and 2 vide judgment, 
dated 23.10.2009, which was assailed by Pakistan Railways 
through an appeal but without any success as the same was 
dismissed by the Punjab Labour Appellate Tribunal, Lahore 
(“PLAT”) vide judgment, dated 17.03.2011; hence, this 
petition.  
2. 
Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that since 
terms and conditions of service of respondents No.1 and 2, 
alongwith others, were being governed under statutory 
service rules, they were debarred to approach the Labour 
Court; that since respondents No.1 and 2 were not in service 
at the time of decision of their grievance petition, the Labour 
Court could not order for their regularization until and 
unless they succeeded to get their reinstatement in service 
through due process; that bona fide of Pakistan Railways is 
evident from the fact that those, who were covered under the 
policy of Federal Government relating to regularization of 
daily 
wage 
employees, 
were 
regularized 
whereas 

3 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
respondents No.1 and 2, having been laid off much prior to 
the introduction of Policy by the Federal Government, were 
not entitled to regularization; that when Railway Authorities 
brought on record the copies of attendance register, letters 
qua dispensing with the services of respondents No.1 and 2 
as well as their departmental appeals, the Labour Court 
could not order for their regularization; that admission on 
the part of respondents No.1 and 2 that they were not in 
service at the time of decision by the Labour Court, dis-
entitled them for regularization. To fortify his contention 
relies on Divisional Superintendent Pakistan Railways, 
Rawalpindi and others v. Syed Usman Ali and others (2021 
SCMR 1008), Pakistan Railways through Chairman, 
Islamabad and another v. Sajid Hussain and others (2020 
SCMR 1664), Chairman Pakistan Railways & others v. Arif 
Hussain and others (2008 PSC 54), Javed Iqbal and 20 
others 
v. 
General 
Manager, 
Pakistan 
Railways, 
Headquarter Office Lahore and 2 others (2006 PLC 604) 
and Muhammad Naeem and 19 others v. Pakistan 
International Airlines Corporation through Chairman and 7 
others (2006 PLC 374).  
3. 
Learned counsel for respondents No.1 and 2, while 
defending the impugned decisions of the fora below, states 
that as respondents No.1 and 2 had been serving the 
department since the year 1992, they filed their grievance 

4 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
petition before the Labour Court on 06.09.2004 seeking 
regularization of their services wherein injunctive order was 
issued in their favour and after dismissal of their grievance 
petition, they promptly approached this Court by filing 
Labour Appeal wherein this Court granted interim relief vide 
order, dated 03.10.2005 and then after remand of the matter 
to the Labour Court, the earlier injunctive order issued by 
the said forum stood revived, thus no penal action could be 
taken against them during the currency of the said order; that 
there is distinction between the employees, who work on 
Ministry of Defence Lines (MOD Lines) and those 
deployed in civil areas and respondents No.1 and 2, 
alongwith other employees, having been deployed in civil 
area throughout their service career, were not hit by the bar 
that employees working on MOD Lines were not amenable 
to the jurisdiction of the Labour Court; that according to 
Section 2 (xxx) of the Industrial Relations Ordinance, 2002 
(“Ordinance, 2002”), any person who has not been 
appointed in supervisory or managerial capacity fall within 
the category of worker or workman and he/she can approach 
the Labour Court and respondents No.1 and 2, having no 
power of hire or fire, rightly approached the Labour Court 
for redressal of their grievance; that since respondents No.1 
and 2 had been working on daily wage basis, they could not 
approach the Federal Service Tribunal rather the proper 

5 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
forum for them was the Labour Court; that it can be seen 
with the naked eye that there is interpolation in the 
attendance register against the name of respondent No.1 as 
the word “P” has been changed into “A” just to show that he 
remained absent from duty on certain days; that services of 
respondent No.2 were dispensed with through a note given 
on a letter concerning promotion of an employee; that 
discriminatory attitude of the Railway Authorities is evident 
from the fact that while regularizing the services of other 
similarly placed persons, respondents No.1 and 2 were 
denied the said relief and that since there are concurrent 
findings of facts against the petitioners, the same are 
immune from interference by this Court in exercise of its 
constitutional jurisdiction under Article 199 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. 
4. 
Learned counsel for the petitioners, while exercising 
his right of rebuttal, states that when respondent No.2, while 
appearing as PW-1, admitted that he was not in service at 
the relevant time, the findings of the courts below cannot be 
considered sacrosanct. Adds that admission on the part of 
respondent No.2/PW-1 that he did not perform duties three 
years prior to making his statement before the Labour Court, 
dis-entitled him for regularization. 
5. 
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and 
have also gone through the documents appended with this 

6 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
petition and those forming part of the record of the Labour 
Court in addition to the case-law referred at the bar. 
6. 
Firstly, taking up the objection raised by the learned 
counsel for the petitioners that since respondents No.1 and 2 
were employees of Pakistan Railways, they could not 
approach the Labour Court seeking regularization of their 
services, I am of the view that it is admitted position that at 
the time of filing grievance petition before the Labour Court, 
respondents No.1 and 2 were serving on work charge basis. 
As per section 3(2) of the Federal Service Tribunal Act, 
1973, the Service Tribunal has exclusive jurisdiction in 
respect of matters relating to the terms and conditions of 
civil servants including disciplinary matters. The term ‘civil 
servant’ has been defined under section 2(a) of the Federal 
Service Tribunal Act, 1973 according to which a civil 
servant means a person who is, or has been, a civil servant 
within the meaning of the Civil Servants Act, 1973. In this 
background, respondents No.1 and 2, being daily wage 
employees of the Pakistan Railways, could not be treated as 
civil servants just to oust the jurisdiction of the Labour 
Court. This Court in the case reported as  General Manager, 
Optical Fibre System Telecom Company Ltd. PTC 
Headquarter, Islamabad and 2 other v. Abdul Rasheed 
Khan, Member NIRC Islamabad and another (2000 PLC 
(CS) 180), while dealing with the matter as to whether the 

7 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
jurisdiction of Service Tribunal is attracted to daily wage 
employees, has inter-alia held as under:- 
“3. The contentions of the learned counsel for 
the petitioners have no force because of the 
latest law laid down by the Honourable 
Supreme Court in Divisional Engineer Phones, 
Phones Divisions, Sukkur and another v. 
Muhammad Shahid and others (1999 PLC (CS) 
1208), also reported as (1999 SCMR 1526) 
wherein it has been explicitly held that the 
persons, 
like 
the 
present 
contesting 
respondents, who were admittedly appointed 
after the creation of the Corporation did not 
enjoy the status of civil servants and, therefore, 
they could not avail of remedy in respect of a 
dispute which related to their terms and 
conditions of service, before the Service 
Tribunal, 
established 
under 
the 
Service 
Tribunal Act, 1973. The Honourable Supreme 
Court has also held that the person who 
belonged to the category of the persons who 
have been declared as "civil servants" under 
section 2-A of the Service Tribunal Act, 1973 
for the purposes of availing of the remedy 
before the Service Tribunal in-the absence of a 
corresponding amendment in the Civil Servants 
Act, 1973 cannot automatically become "civil 
servants" within the meaning of Civil Servants 
Act, 1973. 
  
4. On the strength of the law laid down by the 
Honourable Supreme Court in Divisional 
Engineer Phones, Phones Division, Sukkur and 
another v. Muhammad Shahid and others 
(supra), it is held that private contesting 
respondents, who are merely daily wagers, are 
not civil servants because of the absence of the 
corresponding amendment in the Civil Servants 
Act, 1973 and also because admittedly they 
were taken into employment by the petitioners 
after the creation of the statutory Corporation. 
They have, thus, no remedy of an appeal before 
the Service Tribunal and the bar of Article 212 
of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973, is not attracted to their case. 
The proceedings pending before the N.I.R.C. 

8 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
cannot, therefore, be held to be without 
jurisdiction.” 
If the objection raised by learned counsel for the petitioners 
is seen in the light of the afore-referred judgment, there 
leaves no ambiguity that the same does not hold any water. 
7. 
Admittedly, respondents No.1 and 2 filed grievance 
petition under Section 46 of the IRO, 2002.  Section 2 (xxx) 
of the IRO, 2002 deals with definition of worker/workman. 
The said provision, for facility of reference, is reproduced 
herein below:- 
“(xxx) "worker" and "workman" means any 
and all persons not falling within the definition 
of 
employer 
who 
is 
employed 
in 
an 
establishment or industry for remuneration or 
reward either directly or through a contractor, 
whether the terms of employment be express or 
implied, and for the purpose of any proceeding 
under this Ordinance in relation to an 
industrial dispute includes a person who has 
been dismissed, discharged, retrenched, laid-off 
or otherwise removed from employment in 
connection with or as a consequence of that 
dispute 
or 
whose 
dismissal, 
discharge, 
retrenchment, lay-off or removal has led to that 
dispute but does not include any person who is 
employed 
mainly 
in 
a 
managerial 
or 
administrative capacity.” 
If the status of respondents No.1 and 2 is seen in the light of 
the afore-quoted definition clause, the irresistible conclusion 
is that since they were not employed in managerial or 
administrative capacity, they were covered under the 
definition of workman, thus they rightly filed grievance 
petition before the Labour Court. 

9 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
8. 
It is relevant to note that as per Section 2 (f) of the 
Industrial and Commercial Employment (Standing Orders) 
Ordinance, 1968, an industrial establishment means:- 
“(f)   “industrial establishment” means– 
(i)  
an 
industrial 
establishment 
as 
defined in  
clause (ii) of  section 2 
of the Payment of  Wages 
Act, 
1936 (IV of 1936);  or 
(ii)   a factory as defined in clause (j) of 
section 2  
of the Factories Act, 
1934 (XXV of 1934); or 
(iii)   a railway as defined in clause (4) of 
section 3  
of the Railways Act, 
1890 (IX of 1890); or 
[(iv)  the establishment of a contractor 
who, directly  or indirectly, employs 
workmen in connection  
with 
the 
execution of a contract to which he is 
a  
party, 
and 
includes 
the 
premises in which, or the  site 
at 
which, any process connected with 
such  execution is carried on; 
[(v)   the establishment of a person who, 
directly or  indirectly, 
employs 
workmen in connection  
with any 
construction industry;] 
According to the afore-quoted provision, Railway falls 
within the purview of an industrial establishment thus its 
daily wage/work charge employees cannot be brought out of 
the jurisdiction of the Labour Court. 
9. 
It is matter of record that during pendency of 
proceedings before the Labour Court, the Railway 
Authorities filed application under Order VII rule 11 CPC 
seeking rejection of the grievance petition filed by 

10 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
respondents No.1 and 2, along with others, on the point of 
jurisdiction but said application was dismissed by the 
Labour Court vide order, dated 21.02.2005, and said order 
having not been challenged any further attained finality. Had 
the Railway Authorities so serious in respect of point of 
jurisdiction, they were supposed to challenge the order of 
the Labour Court, dated 21.02.2005, but having not done so, 
they acquiesced with the decision of the Labour Court.  
10. 
Insofar as the case-law, referred by the learned 
counsel for the petitioners, challenging the jurisdiction of the 
Labour Court to take cognizance of the matter agitated by 
respondents No.1 and 2 is concerned, I am of the view that 
the same is inapplicable to the facts and circumstances of the 
present case inasmuch as in the case of Chairman Pakistan 
Railway, (supra) not a single word has been uttered by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court that Labour Court has no 
jurisdiction to deal with the cases of work charge employees 
of Pakistan Railways.  Similarly, in the matter of Pakistan 
Railways through Chairman and others (spura), the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan maintained the order of the 
Federal Service Tribunal issuing direction to Railway 
Authorities to consider the case of the employees before it 
for regularization and even in the said judgment, the 
question as to whether the Labour Court has the jurisdiction 
to dilate upon any issue relating to work charge employees 

11 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
of Pakistan Railway was not even touched. In this backdrop, 
the objection raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners 
against the jurisdiction of the Labour Court is hereby 
spurned.  
11. 
During arguments, learned counsel for the petitioners 
put much emphasis on the fact that since respondents No.1 
and 2 were serving on MOD Lines, they could not approach 
the Labour Court.  Firstly, since no document showing that 
respondents No.1 and 2 had been working on MOD Lines 
has been brought on record during evidence before the 
Labour Court, the said oral assertion cannot be given any 
weightage.  Secondly, the assertion of learned counsel for 
respondents No.1 and 2 that they had been working in civil 
areas, has not specifically been repelled by the learned 
counsel for the petitioners.  Moreover, respondents No.1 and 
2, alongwith others, filed grievance petition before the 
Labour Court inter alia praying that since they had already 
attained the status of permanent workmen, they were entitled 
for regularization and the advertisement got published by the 
Railway Authorities for recruitment against the posts being 
held by them was illegal. Undeniably, the petitioners got 
published advertisement for recruitment against the post 
being held by respondent No.1 which  for convenience of 
reference is imaged below:- 

12 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From above-imaged advertisement, it is vividly clear that the 
petitioners were hired for Civil Line Range, thus, the 
assertion of the learned counsel for the petitioners that 

13 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
respondents No.1 & 2 were hired for MOD Line being 
contrary to the above advertisement does not hold any 
substance. In the given circumstances, the case-law, referred 
by the learned counsel for the petitioners in support of the 
objection, under discussion is irrelevant. 
12. 
Now taking up the plea of the learned counsel for the 
petitioners that since respondents No.1 and 2 were not in 
service at the time of decision by the Labour Court, they 
could not be regularized. To appreciate the plea of the 
learned counsel for the petitioners, I have gone through the 
record of the Labour Court. A perusal of the order sheet of 
the Labour Court shows that on the preliminary date of 
hearing viz. 06.09.2004, the Labour Court passed the 
following order:- 
 وکلسن اسالیئن احرض۔ دعب رٹارفسن سیک شیپ وہا۔ درج ررٹسج وہوے۔ ونسٹ
انبم دماععلی ھم رقتبر 
15.09.2004
 اجری وہوے۔ ونسٹ ربدروخاتسStay
 
 رقتبررقمرہ اترخی اجری وہوے۔ ومفق
امستع دش۔ 
 ارگ ان ےک الخف ااسی
وکیئ مکح ہن اصدر وہا وہ وت اترخی رقمرہ کت ان وک ہن اٹہای اجےئ۔ 
From above, it is crystal clear that Railway Authorities were 
restrained to remove the petitioners from service, if no order 
was passed against them till then and the said injunctive 
order remained intact upto the final decision of the Labour 
Court on 05.09.2005. Being aggrieved of the judgment 
passed by the Labour Court dismissing their grievance 
petition, respondents No.1 and 2, along with others, filed 

14 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
Labour Appeal No.306/2005 which came up for preliminary 
hearing before this Court on 03.10.2005 when following 
order was passed:- 
 
“Learned counsel for the parties have 
been heard. In order to appreciate the 
contentions raised on behalf of the both the 
sides let the record of the Labour Court be 
requisitioned 
C.M. No.1/2005 
 
If the appellants are currently employed 
and working status quo shall be maintained till 
the next date of hearing viz 12.10.2005.” 
From above, it is vividly clear that parties were directed to 
maintain status-quo and the said injunctive order remained 
intact till decision of the matter by this Court through order, 
dated 03.07.2006, when the matter was remanded to the 
Labour Court.  Moreover, when order passed by the Labour 
Court, dismissing the grievance petition filed by respondents 
No.1 and 2 and others, was set aside their grievance petition 
stood revived, as a result, the injunctive order, issued by the 
Labour Court on 06.09.2004, also became operative which 
remained intact up to the decision of the matter by the 
Labour Court during post remand proceedings. In the given 
scenario, it is more than clear that services of respondents 
No.1 and 2 were laid off during subsistence of injunctive 
order, issued by the Labour Court, thus said action on the 
part of the petitioners could not be used against respondents 
No.1 and 2 while denying the relief of regularization. 

15 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
13. 
While addressing the Court, learned counsel for the 
petitioners took specific plea that since respondents No.1 
and 2 were laid off prior to passing of impugned decision by 
the Labour Court, they were entitled to regularization. To 
fortify said fact learned counsel referred to copy of 
attendance register (Exh.R-1). For convenience of reference, 
the said document is imaged below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
A cursory glance over the above-imaged document shows 
that with a view to establish that respondent No.1 remained 

16 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
absent from duty from 01.10.2005 to 05.10.2005, the word 
“P” was changed into “A”.  The said fact alone is sufficient 
to prove mala fide on the part of the Railways Authorities to 
deal with matter of respondents No.1 and 2. 
14. 
While assisting the Court, learned counsel for the 
petitioners put much emphasis on the fact that since 
respondent No.2 filed departmental appeal (Exh.R/4) against 
his termination from service, he could not seek 
regularization without his reinstatement. Perhaps, learned 
counsel has raised said plea in oblivion of the statement of 
RW-2, who during cross-examination, admitted that referred 
appeal (Exh.R/4) was not presented to Signal Shop. Even if 
it presumed that respondent No.2 filed departmental appeal, 
the same was not relevant especially when respondent No.2, 
while appearing as PW-2, clarified that he had been 
agitating the matter before the departmental authorities for 
assignment of duty. 
15. 
While going through the record of the Labour Court, I 
have noted that respondent No.2 was terminated from 
service through letter (Exh.R-3) but perusal of the said 
document shows that the same related to promotion of one 
Manzoor Hussain whereas on the margin of the said 
document a note has been given to the effect that respondent 

17 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
No.2 was terminated from service. For the purpose of 
reference, the said document is imaged below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The above-imaged document speaks loud about the fact that 
with a view to deprive respondents No.1 and 2 of their right 
of regularization, the Railways Authorities proceeded to lay 
them off without adopting due process of law. While taking 

18 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
note of the conduct of the Railway Authorities towards 
dispensing with the services of respondent No.1 and 2, 
PLAT has inter alia observed as under:- 
“11. 
The record shows that about 40 TLA employees 
were regularized by the competent authority vide order 
dated 10.09.2009 (page No.117 of the Labour Court file).  
There is an örder passed by one Mr. Muhammad Farooq 
for Divisional Superintendent Pakistan Railways Lahore 
which shows that the respondents were discharged from 
services and in their cases the exact wording of the order 
reads as follows: 
"That Mr. Abdul Rashid S/O Muhammad Sharif & 
Mr. Babar Gill were working on T.L.A. with one 
day break after every 89 days against permanent 
posts. The recruitment of permanent staff as 
A.P.E.D. were carried out on   /10/2005 & the 
selected staff i.e. APED's were posted against 
permanent 
vacancies 
and 
these 
two 
T.L.A. 
employees have to be discharged from duty. 
As per Railway Ministry directives, the T.LA. staff 
presently working on T.LA. were regularized during 
10/2007 vide General Manager/ Personnel/lahore's 
letter No.803-E/7/4-X/1( APO-IV) dated 07.09.2007 
(copy enclosed) after observing all the formalities 
& were posted against the permanent posts. At that 
time these employees were not working against 
T.L.A. as they had been discharged since 2005." 
(page No. 131 of the Labour Court file). 
12. This clearly shows that the respondents were employed 
against permanent posts and were ousted from service after 
rendering services of over sixteen years without any show 
cause notice or any enquiry when they had attained 
permanent status by the passage of time. This order is 
visibly repugnant to the provisions of Standing Order 12(3) 
of the Standing Orders Ordinance, 1968.” 
16. 
It is important to observe here that though the stance 
of the petitioners, throughout the proceedings, has been that 
since respondents No.1 & 2 were no more in service at the 
time of announcement of policy by the Federal Government 
regarding regularization of daily wage employees, they 
could not avail benefit of said policy but they have not been 
able to give any reason for non-production of order relating 

19 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
to termination of respondent No.1 from service. This fact 
also casts serious doubt about the conduct of the Railway 
Authorities. 
17. 
There is no cavil with the fact that for seeking 
regularization, it is incumbent upon the person concerned to 
prove that he is in service. Insofar as case in hand is 
concerned, at the cost of repetition it is observed that when 
respondents No.1 and 2 were in service at the time of filing 
of their grievance petition in the year 2004, thus any 
subsequent action by the departmental authorities during 
currency of injunctive order was subject to scrutiny by the 
Labour Court, thus no exception can be taken against the 
decisions of the labour fora declaring respondents No.1 & 2 
entitled for reinstatement as well as regularization.  
18. 
During the course of arguments learned counsel for 
the petitioners, with a view to establish that respondents 
No.1 and 2 were not in service at the time of decision of the 
matter by the Labour Court, repeatedly referred to statement 
of PW-2 but has not been able to convince the Court as to 
how their services could be laid off/terminated during 
currency of injunctive orders issued by the Labour Court and 
this Court. 
19. 
While scanning record of the Labour Court, I have 
observed that while filing reply to the grievance petition, 

20 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
filed by respondents No.1 and 2, along with others, the 
Railway Authorities in reply to para 11 of the grievance 
petition averred as under:- 
“11. Admitted to this extent that the temporary 
labour arrangements are working against the 
permanent post and they have been directed to 
submit their applications for recruitment on 
permanent basis.” 
The above stance of the Railway Authorities further 
strengthen the case of respondents No.1 & 2 for the reason 
that if they were working against posts of permanent nature 
they attained the status of permanent nature after expiry of 
requisite period. If any case-law is required, reference can be 
made to the case of Pakistan Telecommunication Company 
Ltd. Through General Manager and another v. Din 
Muhammad & others (2019 PLC 30). Moreover, if 
respondents No.1 & 2 attained the status of a permanent 
workmen much prior to filing the grievance petition, their 
services could not be terminated without adhering to the 
procedure laid down under Order 12 of the Industrial and 
Commercial Employment (Standing Orders), Ordinance, 
1968, thus, their termination, without adopting the due 
process, could not be used to impede the way of respondents 
No.1 and 2 for regularization. 
20. 
Even otherwise, if any action is taken against a party 
during pendency of any proceedings before a court of law, 
the same is subject to scrutiny by the relevant court as it is 

21 
W.P. No.13846/2011 
 
 
clothed with the power to take note of subsequent events 
while deciding lis between the parties. Had respondents 
No.1 and 2 not been before the courts of law prior to their 
acclaimed termination, the position might have been 
different but when the Railway Authorities proceeded to 
dispense with their services during subsistence of 
proceedings and especially when the interim injunction was 
in the field, the jurisdiction of the Labour Court to declare 
respondents No.1 and 2 as permanent workmen could not be 
abridged.  
21. 
As per law laid down by the apex Court of the country 
in the case of Farhat Jabeen v. Muhammad Safdar and 
others (2011 SCMR 1073) concurrent findings of facts 
recorded by the courts below cannot be upset in 
Constitutional jurisdiction until and unless they are proved 
to be perverse or result of arbitrariness which, in my humble 
estimation, is not the position in the case in hand. 
22. 
For what has been discussed above, I see no force in 
this petition which is dismissed leaving the parties to bear 
their respective costs.  
 
 
 
 
 
            (Shujaat Ali Khan) 
 
     
                      
                Judge  
 
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Judge 
M.Tahir* 

