StereoHCJDA 38 
Judgment Sheet 
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT, LAHORE 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 
 
 
 
 
Civil Revision No. 56505/2022 
 
 
 Farrukh Shahzad           Versus         Maqbool Hussain Awan. 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
Date of hearing: 04.04.2024. 
 
Petitioners by: 
Mr. Ali Masood Hayat, Advocate. 
 
Respondents by: Ch. Abdul Majeed, Advocate for the 
respondent in this petition assisted by Ch. 
Ahsan-ul-Haq and Ch. Zahid Majeed, 
Advocates.  
 
Nemo for respondents No.2 to 5 in Civil 
Revisions No.58046/2022, & 58055/2022 
(proceeded against ex-parte vide order dated 
01.04.2024). 
Shujaat Ali Khan, J: - Through this single judgment, I intend 
to decide Civil Revision No. 56505/2022 (“this petition”) as well as 
Civil 
Revision 
Petitions 
No. 
58038/2022, 
58046/2022 
and 
58055/2022 (“connected Civil Revisions”) having commonality of 
law and facts. 
2. 
Tersely, the factual background of this petition is that Maqbool 
Hussain Awan (hereinafter to be referred as respondent No.1) filed 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--2-- 
 
 
 
suit against the petitioner-defendant (Farrukh Shehzad Malik) seeking 
declaration to the effect that he was owner-in-possession of the 
properties mentioned in the heading of the plaint whereas Mutations 
No.2476, 2489, 2894 and 2858 were got attested in favour of the 
petitioner-defendant as Benamidar. It was also prayed that petitioner-
defendant be restrained to further alienate the suit properties and to 
interfere in his possession. Initially, the suit filed by respondent No.1 
was decreed by the learned Civil Judge Class-II, Faisalabad vide ex-
parte judgment and decree, dated 02.04.2016, however, on the 
application of the petitioner-defendant the ex-parte judgment and 
decree was set aside vide order, dated 17.09.2018 and the petitioner-
defendant was allowed to join the proceedings of the suit. After 
recording evidence of the parties and hearing their respective 
arguments, the learned Civil Judge, 1st Class, Faisalabad (learned 
Trial Court) dismissed the suit through judgment and decree dated 
12.12.2020 against which respondent No.1 filed appeal in terms of 
section 96 CPC. Alongwith the said appeal, respondent No.1 also filed 
an application seeking permission to bring on record certain 
documents in the shape of additional evidence. The learned Additional 
District Judge, Faisalabad (the learned Appellate Court) vide 
judgment, dated 08.09.2022, not only accepted the application of 
respondent No.1 for placing on record certain documents but also 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--3-- 
 
 
 
allowed the appeal and while reversing the findings of the learned 
Trial Court decreed the suit of respondent No.1. 
3. 
The facts, as gleaned out from Civil Revision No.58038/2022 
(one of the connected Civil Revision Petitions), are that respondent 
No.1 filed suit against the petitioner-defendant (Amir Ishaq Malik) 
seeking declaration to the effect that he was owner-in-possession of 
the properties mentioned in the heading of the plaint whereas 
Mutations No.2888, 2893, 2900, 2940, 2477 and 2991 were got 
attested in favour of the petitioner-defendant as Benamidar. It was 
also prayed that petitioner-defendant be restrained to further alienate 
the suit properties and to interfere in his possession. Initially, the suit 
filed by respondent No.1 was decreed by the learned Civil Judge, 
Faisalabad vide ex-parte judgment and decree, dated 02.04.2016, 
however, the ex-parte judgment and decree was set aside vide order, 
dated 17.09.2018 and the petitioner-defendant was allowed to join the 
proceedings of the suit. After recording evidence of the parties and 
hearing their respective contentions, the learned Trial Court dismissed 
the suit through judgment and decree, dated 12.12.2020, against 
which respondent No.1 filed appeal under section 96 CPC. Alongwith 
the said appeal, respondent No.1 also filed an application seeking 
permission to bring on record certain documents in the shape of 
additional evidence. The learned Appellate Court vide judgment, 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--4-- 
 
 
 
dated 08.09.2022 not only accepted the application of respondent 
No.1 for placing on record certain documents but also allowed the 
appeal and while reversing the findings of the learned Trial Court 
decreed the suit of respondent No.1. 
4. 
Insofar as factual edifice of connected Civil Revision 
No.58046/2022 is concerned, respondent No.1 filed suit against the 
petitioner-defendant (Zain Malik) seeking declaration to the effect that 
he was owner-in-possession of the properties mentioned in the 
heading of the plaint whereas Mutations No.2488, 2859, 2892, 2947, 
2973, 2989, 2985, and 2977 were got attested in favour of the 
petitioner-defendant as Benamidar. It was also prayed that petitioner-
defendant be permanently restrained to further alienate the suit 
properties and to interfere in his possession. Initially, the suit filed by 
respondent No.1 was decreed by the learned Civil Judge, Faisalabad 
vide ex-parte judgment and decree, dated 02.04.2016. Respondent 
No.1, in the first instance, got transferred the suit land in his name in 
execution of ex-parte judgment and decree and subsequently 
transferred the same in the name of respondents No.2 to 5, as a result 
they were impleaded as party in the proceedings. Later on, the ex-
parte judgment and decree was set aside by the learned Civil Judge 
vide order, dated 17.09.2018 and the petitioner-defendant was allowed 
to join the proceedings of the suit. After recording evidence of the 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--5-- 
 
 
 
parties and hearing their respective pleas, the learned Trial Court 
dismissed the suit through judgment and decree, dated 12.12.2020, 
against which respondent No.1 filed appeal under section 96 CPC. 
Alongwith the said appeal, respondent No.1 also filed an application 
seeking permission to bring on record certain documents in the shape 
of additional evidence. The learned Appellate Court vide judgment & 
decree, dated 08.09.2022, not only accepted the application of 
respondent No.1 for placing on record certain documents as additional 
evidence but also allowed the appeal and while reversing the findings 
of the trial court decreed the suit of respondent No.1. 
 
5. 
Now coming to factual narration of connected Civil Revision 
No.58055/2022, I have noted that respondent No.1 filed suit against 
the petitioner-defendant (Salman Ahmed Khan) seeking declaration to 
the effect that he was owner-in-possession of the properties mentioned 
in the heading of the plaint whereas Mutations No.2884, 2970, 2482 
and 2493 were got attested in favour of the petitioner-defendant as 
Benamidar. It was also prayed that petitioner-defendant be 
permanently restrained to further alienate the suit properties and to 
interfere in his possession. Initially, the suit filed by respondent No.1 
was decreed by the learned Civil Judge, Faisalabad vide ex-parte 
judgment and decree, dated 02.04.2016. Respondent No.1, firstly got 
transferred the suit land in his name in execution of ex-parte judgment 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--6-- 
 
 
 
and decree and subsequently transferred the same in the name of 
respondents No.2 to 5, as a result they were impleaded as party in the 
proceedings. Later on, the ex-parte judgment and decree was set aside 
by the learned Civil Judge vide order, dated 17.09.2018 and the 
petitioner-defendant was allowed to join the proceedings of the suit. 
After recording evidence of the parties and hearing their respective 
contentions, the learned Trial Court dismissed the suit through 
judgment and decree, dated 12.12.2020, against which respondent 
No.1 filed appeal. Alongwith the said appeal, respondent No.1 also 
filed an application seeking permission to bring on record certain 
documents in the shape of additional evidence. The learned Appellate 
Court vide judgment & decree, dated 08.09.2022, not only accepted 
the application of respondent No.1 for placing on record certain 
documents but also allowed the appeal and while reversing the 
findings of the trial court decreed the suit of respondent No.1. 
 
6. 
The submissions made by the learned counsel for the 
petitioners-defendants at the bar and those contained in the paper-
book, submitted by him during arguments, can be summed up in the 
words that that the plaints of the suits filed by respondent No.1 were 
deficient in respect of necessary details which fact escaped notice of 
learned Appellate Court hence, its decisions are not sustainable; that 
applications filed by respondent No.1 under Order XLI rule 27 CPC 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--7-- 
 
 
 
could not be allowed as no party can be permitted to make up 
deficiencies in its case, under the garb of additional evidence, at the 
appellate stage; that well-reasoned judgment of the learned Trial 
Court was reversed by the learned Appellate Court in a casual 
manner; that when the documents were neither exhibited before the 
learned Appellate Court, as per law, nor the petitioners-defendants 
were allowed to impeach the authenticity of the said documents, same 
could not be read in evidence while deciding the appeals filed by 
respondent No.1; that suits of respondent No.1 could not be decreed 
in presence of equivocal statement of PW-1 that he did not know the 
petitioners-defendants; that the motive for benami transactions, given 
by respondent No.1 in his plaints, was the tax-evasion, which being an 
offence, could not be treated as valid one; that documents tendered 
during statement of the counsel cannot be read while deciding lis 
between the parties; that the learned Appellate Court failed to 
appreciate that necessary ingredients of a benami transaction were 
missing in the suits filed by respondent No.1, thus, his appeals could 
not be allowed; that when the agreements, express or implied, 
between petitioners-defendants and respondent No.1 regarding 
benami transaction were not proved, the suits of the latter could not be 
decreed; that the learned Appellate Court failed to appreciate that the 
evidence led by petitioners-defendants was sufficient to believe that 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--8-- 
 
 
 
they were the real owners and that the petitioners-defendants are 
going to initiate criminal proceedings against respondent No.1. To 
fortify his contentions, learned counsel has relied upon the cases 
reported as Muhammad Yousaf and others v. Muhammad Ishaq 
Rana (deceased) through LRs and others (2023 SCMR 572), 
Muhammad Mumtaz Shah (deceased) through LRs. and others v. 
Ghulam Hussain Shah (deceased) through LRs. and others (2023 
SCMR 1155), Mst. Akhtar Sultana v. Major Retd. Muzaffar Khan 
Malik through his legal heirs and others (PLD 2021 SC 715), 
Muhammad Siddique v. Gul Nawaz and others (2021 SCMR 1480), 
Rana Abdul Aleem Khan v. Idara National Industrial Co-Operative 
Finance Corporation Defunct through Chairman Punjab Cooperative 
Board for Liquidation, Lahore and another (2016 SCMR 2067), Niaz 
Rasool through Muhammad Bilal v. Mst. PARVEEN IKRAM and 
others (2013 SCMR 397), Ghulam Murtaza v. Mst. Asia Bibi and 
others (PLD 2010 SC 569), Syed Muhammad Hassan Shah and 
others v. Mst. Binat-e-Fatima and another (PLD 2008 SC 564), 
Muhammad Feroze and others v. Muhammad Jamaat Ali (2006 
SCMR 1304), Shtamand and others v. Zahir Shah and others (2005 
SCMR 348), Muhammad Yousaf v. Mst. Maqsooda Anjum and others 
(2004 SCMR 1049), Rehmatullah v. Fazal Baqi and another (1998 
SCMR 670), Muhammad Amir v. Khan Bahadur and another (PLD 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--9-- 
 
 
 
1996 SC 267), Muhammad Sajjad Hussain v. Muhammad Anwar 
Hussain (1991 SCMR 703), Nazir Ahmad and 3 others v. Mushtaq 
Ahmad and another (1988 SCMR 1653), MAD AJAB and others v. 
Awal Badshah (1984 SCMR 440), Abdur Rehman and others v. Abdul 
Qadir and others (PLJ 1999 SC (AJ&K) 1), Izat Ali v. Muhammad 
Ashfaq and others (2022 CLC 2090), Mst. SHAHEENA BIBI v. 
SHAUKAT ALI and others  (2020 MLD 1279), Ghulam Haider v. 
Ghulam Qadir (2019 CLC 770), Abdul Majeed through Legal Heirs 
v. Abdul Rasheed and others (PLD 2016 Lahore 383),  Abdul Haq v. 
Mst. Mughalani and 10 others (PLJ 1999 Lahore 1071), Muhammad 
Younus and 2 others v. Abdul Ghaffar and others (1998 MLD 1622) 
and Rahim Bakhsh and another v. Civil Judge, Lodhran and 3 others 
(1985 CLC 387), Nedumkandathil Koyakutty v. Kunhali and others 
(AIR (33) 1946 Madras 203), Parawa Sangappa and others v. 
Rayangouda Chandramappa (AIR 1939 Bombay 401), K.M. 
Srinivasam Pillai v. Y.P.R.L.Alagappa Chettiar and another (AIR 
1938 Madras 372), Shadi Ram v. Mst. Atri and another (AIR 1936 
Lahore 933) and Surendrakumar Chaudhury and others v. 
Gangachandra Chaudhury and others (AIR 1934 Calcutta 627). 
 
7. 
On the other hand, learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
respondent No.1, while defending the impugned judgments and 
decrees passed by the learned Appellate Court, argues that since not 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--10-- 
 
 
 
only consideration amount was paid by his client but also agreements 
to sell were executed in his favour, the learned Appellate Court has 
committed no illegality while declaring the petitioners-defendants as 
benamidars; that presence of son of respondent No.1, at the time of 
attestation of subject mutations, speaks loud about the fact that 
petitioners-defendants were just benamidars; that non-participation of 
the petitioners-defendants in the alienation proceedings at any stage 
stands proof of the fact that they were not the real owners rather they 
were just benamidars; that possession of respondent No.1 over the 
suit properties renders it crystal clear that he is the real owner; that 
non-participation of the petitioners-defendants during alienation 
proceedings and their non-appearance in person, during proceedings 
before the courts, affirms that they were alien to the sale transactions; 
that when the findings of the learned Trial Court were based upon 
suppositions, no illegality has been committed by the learned 
Appellate Court while reversing the same; that though question of 
limitation was not raised by the petitioners-defendants but the learned 
Trial Court unnecessarily framed Issue on the said point; that as 
public documents were brought on record by respondent No.1, in the 
shape of additional evidence, no illegality was committed by the 
learned Appellate Court while allowing applications for additional 
evidence; that non-judicial approach on the part of the learned Trial 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--11-- 
 
 
 
Court is evinced from the fact that it relied upon Khasra Girdawaris 
for the year 2020 to believe that petitioners-defendants were in 
possession of the suit properties despite knowing the fact that the 
same having been prepared during pendency of the suits were 
inconsequential upon the rights of the parties and that when the 
petitioners-defendants failed to rebut the claim of respondent No.1 
that major chunk of consideration amount was paid by him through 
his bank account, he was rightly declared to be the real owner by 
learned Appellate Court. 
8. 
Since respondents No.2 to 5 in Civil Revision Nos.58046 & 
58055 of 2022 did not enter appearance despite their service through 
substituted means by way of proclamation in Daily Jang Lahore, 
dated 13.03.2024, they were proceeded against ex-parte through 
orders, dated 01.04.2024, passed in the said petitions.  
 
9. 
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at considerable 
length and have also gone through the documents, annexed with these 
petitions, as well as the case-law, cited at the bar. 
 
10. 
It is admitted position that respondent No.1 alongwith his 
appeals filed applications under Order XLI rule 27 CPC seeking 
permission to place on record certain documents in the shape of 
additional evidence. For convenience of reference, one of the said 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--12-- 
 
 
 
applications, filed by respondent No.1 in his appeal, subject matter of 
this petition, is reproduced herein below:- 
 
IN THE COURT OF DISTRICT JUDGE, FAISALABAD 
 
Maqbool Hussain Versus   Farrukh Shahzad Malik 
 
PETITION UNDER ORDER 41 RULE 27 OF CPC FOR 
PLACING ON RECORD THE FOLLOWING DOCUMENT 
AND EXHIBITION THERETO. 
 
1. Copy of plaint titled “Maqbool Hussain Vs. Muhammad 
Address” pending in the Court of Civil Jude, Kausar 
(sic); 
2. Copy of written statement in suit titled “Maqbool 
Hussain Vs. Muhammad Address” pending in the Court 
of Civil Judge Kausar; 
3. Copy of agreement dated 30.05.2014 
4. Copy of Fard jamabandi pertaining Moza Kalar Kahar 
Tehsil Kalar Kahar District Chakwal. 
5. Sale Deed pertaining to house No.P-32 Rawalpindi. 
6. Sale Deed No.4552 dated 30.07.2001; 
7. Sale Deed No.3557 dated 26.05.2008; 
8. Copy of fard jamabandi pertaining to property situated 
Chak No.166-P Sadiqabad. 
9. Copy of plaint titled “Maqbool Hussain Vs. Ejaz 
Mehood” along with decree. 
10. Copy of plaint titled “Sohail Maqbool Awan Vs. M/s 
Renaissance Developers Pvt. Ltd. 
Respectfully Sheweth, 
1. That above titled appeal is being filed in this Honourable 
Court in which no date of hearing has been fixed so far 
2. That the contents of the appeal may kindly be read as 
necessary part of this petition. 
3. That petitioner has prima facie a good arguable case. 
4. That Trial Court while deciding the fate of case made 
observation that the petitioner failed to place on record 
the document regarding their source and funds though 
the petitioner placed sufficient documents in Trial Court, 
however, in order meet the observations of Trial Court, 
the petitioner intends to produce on record the above 
said document, further, the file is also requiring 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--13-- 
 
 
 
production of document on record. 
5. That affidavit is attached herewith. 
 
 
Prayer 
 In the light of submission made above it is 
therefore respectfully prayed that by 
accepting this petition, petitioner be 
allowed 
to 
place 
and 
exhibits 
the 
documents mentioned in headnote of this 
petition on record for decision of case on 
merit. 
 
 
Petitioner  
 
 
Maqbool Hussain 
Through Counsel: 
 
 
 
Chaudhry Abdul Majeed 
 
 
Advocate Supreme Court of Pakistan 
  
 
52, Tamiz-ud-Din Law Chambers, 
 
 
District Courts Faisalabad 
 
 
Mob. 0300-8655064 
Verification: 
Verified on oath at Faisalabad on 03.02.2021 that all the 
contents of this petition are true and correct to the best of 
my knowledge. 
 
 
Petitioner 
 
A cursory glance over the above quoted application, in particular Para 
No.4 thereof, shows that the reason for production of additional 
evidence was mentioned as “meet with the observation of the civil 
court”. There is no cavil with the fact that additional evidence can be 
allowed to be led even during proceedings before the Apex Court of 
the country but the conditions precedent for exercise of such power 
are that the party concerned should establish that reasons for non-
production of such evidence, before the court of first instance, were 
beyond its control and that the same is inevitable for just decision of 
the lis between the parties. A bird’s eye-view of the afore-quoted 
application brings it to limelight that neither a single word as to the 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--14-- 
 
 
 
reasons for non-production of said documents, during proceedings 
before learned Trial Court, has been uttered nor their relevance for 
just decision of the case has been narrated rather it has been averred 
that the subject application was filed to meet with the observation of 
the learned Trial Court which cannot be considered as valid ground 
allowing production of additional evidence. The Apex Court of the 
country in the case of Shamshad Bibi & others v. Riasat Ali & others 
(PLD 2023 SC 643), while deprecating tendency to permit production 
of additional evidence in routine, to fill in lacunas in the case of a 
party, has inter-alia  held as under:- 
“4. The questions that have arisen for our consideration 
are; whether the High Court, while exercising its 
revisional powers under section 115 of the C.P.C., was 
justified in accepting the application under Order XLI, 
Rule 27 of the C.P.C. and remanding the matter for 
recording of additional evidence; whether the High 
Court, in the absence of jurisdiction having been 
exercised illegally or without material irregularity by the 
subordinate courts, was justified to allow the revision 
petition and remand the matter to the trial Court. The 
powers vested in the High Court under section 115 of the 
C.P.C. are to be exercised in accordance with the 
parameters described in clauses (a) to (c) ibid. The 
revisional powers are meant for correcting errors made 
by the subordinate courts in the exercise of their 
jurisdiction. Ordinarily, erroneous decisions of fact are 
not revisable, except in cases where the decision is based 
on no evidence or inadmissible evidence and is so 
perverse 
that 
grave 
injustice 
would 
result 
therefrom. Rule 27 of Order XLI, C.P.C. empowers the 
appellate Court to allow additional evidence to be 
adduced, whether oral or documentary, after the 
recording of reasons. This power is circumscribed by 
three eventualities described in clauses (a) to (c) i.e. if 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--15-- 
 
 
 
the court, from whose decree the appeal has been 
preferred, has refused to admit evidence which ought to 
have been admitted; the appellate court, on being 
satisfied that the additional evidence was available but 
could not be produced before the trial court for reasons 
beyond the control of the party seeking its production; or 
the appellate court itself requires any such evidence so as 
to enable it to pronounce a judgment. Rule 28 of Order 
XLI describes the procedure for taking additional 
evidence and provides that the appellate Court may 
either take such evidence or direct the court from whose 
decree the appeal is preferred, or any other subordinate 
court, to take such evidence and to send it when taken to 
the appellate court. Rule 29 of Order XLI further 
provides that where additional evidence is directed or 
allowed to be taken, the appellate court shall specify the 
points to which evidence is to be confined and record in 
its proceedings the points so specified……  
5. The power under Order XLI, Rule 27 of the C.P.C. is 
not intended to be exercised to fill up lacunas, or to make 
up any deficiency in the case, nor to provide an 
opportunity to the party to raise a new plea. The power 
essentially has to be exercised cautiously and sparingly 
and not to facilitate an indolent litigant. The court, 
before exercising its jurisdiction of allowing the 
recording of additional evidence, must be satisfied that 
the document sought to be adduced in evidence is not of 
the nature that could be easily fabricated, tampered or 
manufactured. 
6. *****The application was, however, filed before the 
High Court which was exercising revision powers. The 
grounds mentioned in the application, filed under Order 
XLI, Rule 27 of the C.P.C., did not disclose any 
exceptional circumstance to justify the recording of 
additional evidence. The grounds were flimsy and 
appeared to be an attempt to embark upon a fishing or 
roving inquiry. Moreover, it was not denied that the 
evidence sought to be recorded as additional evidence at 
the revision stage was available when the trial was 
pending but no attempt was made to produce it then. The 
remanding of the matter and setting aside of the 
concurrent findings by two competent courts was not in 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--16-- 
 
 
 
consonance with the legislative intent unambiguously 
manifest from principles highlighted above.” 
 
If fate of the order passed by learned Appellate Court permitting 
respondent No.1 to lead additional evidence, at appellate stage, is seen 
in the light of afore-referred judgment of the Apex Court of the 
country it stands established that it violated the settled norms on the 
subject despite the fact that those have binding force upon it in terms 
of Article 189 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973. 
 
11. 
It is pertinent to mention over here that despite addressing the 
Court at certain length, learned counsel representing respondent No.1 
has not been able to convince this Court as to why respondent No.1 
did not produce the documents, subject matter of the application for 
additional evidence, before the learned Trial Court despite the fact 
that in all the cases he was given two chances to produce evidence viz. 
firstly during recording of ex-parte evidence and secondly, at the time 
of recording of evidence of both sides after setting aside of ex-parte 
judgments & decrees. The law favours the vigilant and not the 
indolent as held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the cases reported 
as State Bank of Pakistan through Governor and another v. Imtiaz Ali 
Khan and others (2012 SCMR 280) and Rehmat Din vs. Mirza Nasir 
Abbas (2007 SCMR 1560). 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--17-- 
 
 
 
 
12. 
It is very ironical to note that while allowing applications of 
respondent No.1, for additional evidence, instead of giving an 
opportunity to the petitioners-defendants to impeach the authenticity 
of subject documents, learned Appellate Court proceeded to take the 
same on record on the day when the main appeal was finally decided 
which fact also speaks volumes about lack of legal acumen on the part 
of learned Appellate Court. Had the applications of respondent No.1, 
for production of additional evidence, been decided through 
independent orders, the petitioners-defendants would have an 
opportunity to challenge the same before the higher forum in 
appropriate proceedings. Moreover, it is well-settled by now that 
when an application for additional evidence is allowed either the 
learned Appellate Court can record such evidence by itself or can refer 
the matter to learned Trial Court for said purpose in terms of Order 
XLI rule 28 CPC but in the instant matter neither learned Appellate 
Court recorded the evidence as per guidelines given by Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of Pakistan through its various pronouncements nor 
referred the matter to learned Trial Court for the purpose rather took 
the documents on record without summoning the person(s), who were 
custodian of such documents in ordinary course. Prima-facie, purpose 
behind such approach seems to deprive the petitioners-defendants to 
impeach the character and credibility of said documents. The Apex 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--18-- 
 
 
 
Court of the country, in the case of Muhammad Siddique (Supra), 
while dilating upon the procedure in cases where an application for 
additional evidence is allowed by learned Appellate Court, has inter-
alia held as under: - 
“7. *****In case the application is allowed then the appellate 
court may record the additional evidence itself or direct the 
trial court to record such evidence and to remit the same to the 
appellate court……” 
 
If the conduct of the learned Appellate Court taking documents on 
record as additional evidence, without allowing the petitioners to 
impeach the authenticity thereof, is considered in the light of afore-
referred decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, there 
leaves no doubt that it totally violated the settled principles on the 
subject, thus, the same cannot be approved of rather deserves to be 
deprecated. 
 
13. 
This Court fully agrees with the plea of learned counsel for 
respondent No.1 that the learned Appellate Court had the jurisdiction 
to permit additional evidence but at the same time it cannot be ignored 
that while exercising such jurisdiction it should see as to whether 
there are justiciable reasons for exercise of such powers or not. While 
dealing with a matter in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction, vested 
under section 115 CPC, this Court has to see as to whether any 
jurisdictional defect is there in the decision of the courts below or not. 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--19-- 
 
 
 
Insofar as the cases in hand are concerned, it is observed that it is 
classical example of exercise of jurisdiction by the learned Appellate 
Court with material illegality inasmuch as it failed to note that 
conditions precedent for permitting production of additional evidence 
were missing in these matters.    
14. 
Since the findings of the courts below are at variance, I proceed 
to decide these petitions while appreciating the evidence of the parties 
in the light of the guidelines given by Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan in the case reported as Mst. Zara Gulzar v. Muhammad 
Farooq and another (2022 SCMR 1625).  
15. 
Now reverting to the decisions of learned Appellate Court 
relating to main appeals, filed by respondent No.1, I am of the view 
that in a suit challenging a transaction on the basis of benami, 
plaintiff(s) is bound to prove his source of purchase money; 
possession of the party over the suit land; position of the parties as 
well as their inter-se relationship; the circumstances, pecuniary or 
otherwise, of the alleged transferee; the motive for the transaction; the 
custody and production of the title deed and the previous and 
subsequent conduct of the parties. Now I proceed to examine these 
matters on the basis of above parameters. 
 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--20-- 
 
 
 
16. 
Firstly, taking up the source of purchase money of respondent 
No.1, at the relevant time, I have observed that in his pleadings, he 
claimed himself to be financially well-off person but said stance 
stands belied from the statement of his real son (PW-1) who during 
cross-examination admitted that in the year 2005, when the subject 
mutations were attested in favour of the petitioners-defendants, annual 
income of his father (respondent No.1) was Rs.20,00,000/- to 
Rs.25,00,000/- whereas his (respondent No.1) monthly expenditures 
at that time were Rs.3,00,000/- to Rs.4,00,000/-. If financial position 
of respondent No.1 is seen in the light of statement of PW-1, it stands 
clarified that he was not in a position to save such a huge amount to 
manage funds for purchase of the land, subject matter of these cases, 
as even if his monthly expenditures are considered as Rs.3,00,000/-, in 
the relevant year,  the same comes to Rs.36,00,000/- per annum which 
were more than his annual income. The factum of monthly 
expenditures of respondent No.1, ranging between Rs.2,00,000/- to 
Rs.3,00,000/-, in the year 2005, was also admitted by him while 
appearing as PW-4. Further, PW-1 also showed his inability to clarify 
the name of the Bank from where his father (respondent No.1) 
withdrew the amount to pay the same to the land owners of the suit 
properties. Further, his (PW-1) admission that he did not know the 
petitioners-defendants shows that he had no concern with the purchase 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--21-- 
 
 
 
of land in favour of the petitioners-defendants as benamidars rather he 
appeared as representative of vendees-petitioners-defendants. 
 
17. 
It is also imperative to note that though respondent No.1 
produced plethora of evidence but did not bother to bring on record 
any document to show that he managed funds from his own sources to 
pay the same to the land owners in lieu of agreements to sell executed 
in his favour, thus, his oral assertion in that regard cannot be 
considered as gospel truth.  
 
18. 
Though it is case of respondent No.1 that as his son (PW-1) was 
attesting witness of subject mutations it was to be considered that the 
land was purchased by him (respondent No.1) but the admission of 
PW-1 that he was not aware even about the numbers of the mutations 
attested in favour of the petitioners-defendants renders it crystal clear 
that the land was not purchased in the name of respondent No.1 rather 
the same was purchased by the petitioners-defendants.  
 
19. 
The stance of respondent No.1, throughout the proceedings, has 
been that his son (PW-1) appeared as his representative at the time of 
attestation of mutations but PW-1, during cross-examination, instead 
of clarifying that he appeared on behalf of his father (PW-4), while 
replying to a suggestion that in what capacity he appeared at the time 
of attestation of mutations, contented with the following words: - 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--22-- 
 
 
 
***”
 ااقتنالت رپ رتشمی امندنئہ ںیم یہ اھت
۔“
 
 
If the afore-quoted portion from the statement of PW-1 is considered, 
while putting it in juxtaposition to the claim of the petitioners-
defendants that they are the real owners of the suit properties, it 
becomes abundantly clear that since petitioners-defendants were 
vendees according to the subject mutations, he (PW-1) appeared on 
their behalf and not on behalf of his father (respondent No.1).   
 
20. 
A cursory glance over the plaints of the suits, filed by 
respondent No.1, shows that he took specific plea that he purchased 
the land, subject matter of the suits out of which the present petitions 
have emanated, exclusively from his own sources but during cross-
examination, he (PW-4) admitted that an amount of Rs.12/13 crores 
was transferred by one Major (R) Ijaz in his account. When the said 
admission on the part of respondent No.1 (PW-4) is considered in the 
light of the findings of the learned Trial Court contained in Para 
No.29 of its judgment, dated 12.12.2020, it stands clarified that an 
amount of Rs.13,68,10,000/- was transferred in the account of 
respondent No.1 bearing No. 0404001469507, maintained at Prime 
Commercial Bank, Faisalabad, by Major (R) Ijaz from his account 
No.1015173, Prime Commercial Bank, Rawalpindi. In this regard, 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--23-- 
 
 
 
reference can be made to the following portion from the cross-
examination of respondent No.1 (PW-4): 
***”
 درتس ےہ ہک رجیم ااجعز ڑباBusinessman
 
 ےھت۔ ہی کلم رایض ےک ےئلproperty
 
 اک اکم
وٹن ںیم رٹارفسن وہیئ۔
 
وٹن ےس رمق ریمے ااکئ
 
رکات ےہ۔ درتس ےہ ہک رجیم ااجعزےک ااکئ“
 
 
 
Though, respondent No.1 (PW-4) tried to establish that the afore-
referred amount was not for the purchase of land, subject matter of 
these petitions, rather the same was outstanding against Major (R) Ijaz 
but respondent No.1 did not bother to produce any oral or 
documentary evidence in that regard. In this situation, the plea of 
respondent No.1 that the amount received from Major (R) Ijaz was 
already due against him is not worth consideration.  
 
21. 
It is very interesting to note that according to own evidence of 
respondent No.1, in particular agreement to sell and receipts 
(Exh.P/12 & Exh.P/13), Farrukh Shahzad Malik (petitioner in this 
petition) directly paid Rs.54,00,000/-, to one of the vendors, namely, 
Ghulam Ahmad as consideration amount, thus, the claim of 
respondent No.1 that he paid the entire amount of consideration 
against purchase of suit properties to the exclusion of anyone else, 
falls to the ground. 
 
22. 
While dealing with the point of possession over the suit 
properties, learned Appellate Court has observed that suit land was in 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--24-- 
 
 
 
possession of respondent No.1. Firstly, the said observation stands 
negated from the contents of the Jamabandis (Exh.P/21 to Exh.P/25) 
according to which the properties purchased by the petitioners-
defendants were in their possession. Secondly, according to the copies 
of Khasra Gardawaris for the year 2020 (Exh.D/22 to Exh.D/25) the 
petitioners-defendants were in possession of their respective shares, 
thus, findings of learned Appellate Court being contrary to the record 
cannot be allowed to hold the field even for a moment. 
 
Considering from another angle, if the possession of a party is 
not supported by any legal document, the same cannot be considered 
as lawful. As far as these matters are concerned, at the cost of 
repetition, it is observed that after attestation of mutations in favour of 
the petitioners-defendants, the agreements to sell, executed in favour 
of respondent No.1, became irrelevant, thus, his claim relating to 
possession was not supported by a valid document, thus, said fact 
does not lend any help to him. Reliance in this regard is placed on the 
cases reported as Muhammad Aslam v. Muhammad Ismail and others 
(1999 SCMR 1331) and Saleem Ran and 23 others v. IInd Additional 
Sessions Judge, Malir, Karachi and 5 others (2020 YLR 634). 
 
23. 
It is pertinent to mention over here that throughout the 
proceedings respondent No.1 has been agitating that since their 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--25-- 
 
 
 
purchase he had been in possession of the suit properties as real owner 
whereas the petitioners-defendants were just benamidars but said plea 
of respondent No.1 stands contradicted from the closing lines of 
cross-examination of Shahid Anjum (PW.2). The said witness, while 
replying to a suggestion relating to possession over the suit properties, 
in his cross-examination, inter-alia stated as under: - 
***”اجدیئاد اک اب ہضبق سک ےک اپس ےہ ےھجم ولعمم ہن ےہ۔“
 
In the wake of above statement of PW-2, learned Appellate Court was 
not justified to reverse the findings of learned Trial Court and decree 
the suit of respondent No.1, while treating respondent No.1 in 
possession of the suit properties.  
 
24. 
Inconsistent attitude of respondent No.1 is also discernible from 
the fact that on the one hand he stated that with a view to save himself 
from tax complications, he got transferred the suit properties in the 
names of the petitioners-defendants as benamidars but on the other he 
adopted the plea that he did so just to avoid the exercise of pre-
emption right by co-owner(s). The latter assertion of respondent No.1 
stands belied from the fact that the petitioners-defendants, not being 
owners of any piece of land in the villages where the suit properties 
were situated, their position was not better than that of respondent 
No.1 to counter the claim of pre-emption as best possible defence in 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--26-- 
 
 
 
such event is that the vendee is already owner in the same village and 
the pre-emptor has no preferential right of pre-emption as compared to 
him. In this context following portion from cross-examination of 
respondent No.1 (PW-4) can be quoted with convenience:-  
***”درتس ےہ ہک دماععلی ھم اس ویھکٹ ںیم اس اجدیئاد ےس لبق یسک اجدیئاد ےک امکل ہن ےھت۔“
 
Likewise, the alleged motive to avoid tax complications does not 
appeal to a man of prudent mind inasmuch as tax evasion, being an 
offence under the relevant law, cannot be considered as valid motive. 
Moreover, when respondent No.1 was not a taxpayer, at the time of 
attestation of subject mutations, he being out of tax net, his 
apprehension in respect of tax complications had no basis rather it 
seems to be a self-invented ground taken by him just to maintain the 
suits filed by him. 
 
25. 
The material contradictions amongst the pleadings and the 
statements of PWs regarding motive, as set out by respondent No.1, 
are evinced from following portions from their cross-examinations:-   
”وں ںیم رخدی ایک۔ اتمہ سکیٹ یک اق
 
ہی ہک دمیع ےن رہبق درج رعیض دوعیٰ ےک العوہ درگی رہبق ایس اگئ ونین
 دیچیپویگں ےس ےنچب یک اخرط ااقتنل ربمنی4:;6
 ومرہخ2452754227
  ،
497:
 
 اسل4227
 ،
4698
 
 ومرہخ2952854227
 ،
46:;
 
 ومرہخ5252854227
 
 قحب دماعہیلع دصتقی رکواےئ۔زمدی ش فع ےس
(ےنچب ےک ےئل زجوی ااقتنالت اہےئ رکواےئ۔
ضمن : 
)ٰرعیض دوعی “
 
 
***”طلغ ےہ ہک ش فع ےس ےنچب ےک ےئل
 ہی ااقتنالت ے ما ی رکاےئ۔ (PW-1) “
 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--27-- 
 
 
 
***”
 درتس ےہ ہک ںیم ےن اھکل ہک سکیٹ یک دیچیپویگں ےس ےنچب ےک ےئل ہی اجدیئاد اےنپ مام ہن وگلیئ۔ 
“  (PW-4)
 
 
In the presence of such material contradictions it was not open for 
learned Appellate Court to hold that respondent No.1 proved the 
motive for the alleged benami transaction. 
 
26. 
During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the 
petitioners-defendants put much emphasis on the fact that since the 
plaints of the suits, filed by respondent No.1, were not drawn in line 
with the guidelines provided in the case of Muhammad Yousaf and 
others (Supra), same were liable to be rejected. To appreciate the 
contention raised by learned counsel for the petitioners-defendants, I 
have gone through the plaints of the suits wherein respondent No.1 
neither clarified with exactitude that as to what were the reasons for 
transfer of properties in the name of the petitioners-defendants as 
benamidars nor he disclosed his relationship with them let alone the 
assertion of business relation which too was not disclosed. The Apex 
Court of the country in the case of Muhammad Yousaf and others 
(Supra) while laying down guidelines for success in a suit challenging 
a transaction in favour of a party on the basis of benamidar has inter-
alia held as under: - 
“7.  Be it noted that in cases of alleged benami 
transaction, there may be a ground for suspicion, 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--28-- 
 
 
 
nevertheless, the Court's decision must not be based on 
suspicion or conjecture, but on legal grounds. We, 
therefore, wish to say that it is one of the essential 
elements of a fair trial that the law must be applied to 
any transaction in the light of its ordinary course of 
human conduct. Keeping this in mind when we analyze 
the benami transaction, we find that there are three 
persons involved in it - the seller, the real owner, and 
the ostensible owner or benamidar, and, in the 
ordinary course of human conduct, it encompasses two 
different contracts, one is the contract, express or 
implied, between the ostensible owner and the 
purchaser (real owner) and it specifically mentions two 
things. First, the real owner expresses his desire or 
compulsion 
(also 
called 
motive) 
and 
obtains 
permission from the ostensible owner (Benamidar) to 
purchase the property in his name after paying the 
consideration amount to the seller, and second, it talks 
about the consent of the ostensible owner (Benamidar) 
that whenever the real owner demands, he will be 
bound to transfer the property to him. The other is a 
contract between the ostensible owner (Benamidar) 
and the seller of the property. It is important to note 
here that both the above contracts, though differ from 
each other in their legal character and incidents, 
complement 
each 
other 
to 
establish 
benami 
transaction, and thus, in cases of such transaction, the 
plaintiff must first state them, in detail, in his plaint, 
and then prove them by legal testimony, and failure to 
do so is fatal. Mindful of this legal position, we have 
perused the pleadings and the evidence brought on 
record and find that they fall short of the material facts 
mentioned above. This omission cannot be condoned 
and that alone is sufficient to reject the claim of the 
appellants.” 
When the plaints of the suits, filed by respondent No.1, are seen in the 
light of the guidelines provided in the afore-quoted judgment of the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, it becomes abundantly clear that 
neither he disclosed the contract (express or implied) between him and 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--29-- 
 
 
 
the petitioners-defendants to get the properties transferred in their 
name as benamidars nor he has referred to any permission by the 
petitioners-defendants allowing him to transfer the properties in their 
name as benamidars especially when the petitioners-defendants were 
equally amenable to tax complications in the event of transfer of land 
in their names as benamidars as claimed by respondent No.1 and 
nobody allows another person to undertake any transaction in his 
name inviting action by the relevant authorities. Thus, the standards 
set by Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the referred judgment 
remained unfulfilled.  
 
27. 
The custody and production of the title documents of property, 
subject matter of a suit filed on the basis of benami transaction, has 
important bearing on the outcome of the lis between the parties. 
Insofar as the cases in hand are concerned, the copies of the 
mutations, subject matter of these petitions, were brought on record by 
the petitioners-defendants to prove that they were the real owners. On 
the other hand, respondent No.1, instead of producing title documents 
to show that those were in his possession, contented with production 
of agreements to sell in evidence and pleaded that since not only 
agreements to sell were executed in his favour but also his son joined 
the proceedings relating to attestation of mutations in favour of the 
petitioners-defendants, they were only benamidars. Firstly, taking up 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--30-- 
 
 
 
execution of agreements to sell in favour of respondent No.1, I am of 
the view that while replying to a suggestion as to the names of the 
persons, who executed agreements to sell in his favour, respondent 
No.1 stated as under: - 
ےھجم اس وتق اید ہن ےہ ہک ریما اعمدہہ نک نک ارفاد ےس وہا اھت۔ 
In presence of admission regarding lack of such important fact, mere 
execution of agreements to sell in favouor of respondent No.1 could 
not be used to believe him as real owner. Moreover, just execution of 
an agreement to sell, in favour of a party, cannot be considered as a 
title document. Reliance in this regard is placed on Rao Abdul 
Rehman (deceased) v. Muhammad Afzal (deceased) (2023 SCMR 
815) and Falak Sher v. Province of Punjab (2017 SCMR 1882). In 
the former case the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, while dealing 
with the status of agreement to sell vis-à-vis title of ownership, has 
inter-alia held as under:- 
“6.*****On the basis of a sale agreement, no legal character 
or right can be established to prove the title of the property 
unless the title is transferred pursuant to such agreement to 
sell, but in case of denial or refusal by the vendor to specifically 
perform the agreement despite the readiness and willingness of 
the vendee, a suit for specific performance may be instituted in 
the court ……” 
 
If the fate of production of agreements to sell by respondent No.1, to 
fulfill the condition of production of title documents, is seen in the 
light of afore-referred judgments of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--31-- 
 
 
 
Pakistan, there leaves no ambiguity that respondent No.1 failed to 
discharge his duty towards production of title documents. Moreover, 
if the petitioners-defendants were just benamidars, there was nobody 
barring them to get incorporated in column No.12 of the mutations 
that the same were based on the agreements to sell executed in favour 
of respondent No.1 but in absence of such important note in the 
relevant column of the subject mutations, it cannot be believed, at the 
whims of respondent No.1, that the same were attested on the basis of 
agreements to sell executed in his favour.  
 
28. 
Insofar as reliance of respondent No.1 upon attestation of 
subject mutations in presence of his son (PW-1), is concerned, suffice 
it to note that in the wake of unequivocal admission on the part of 
PW-1 that he did not know the petitioners-defendants, said fact can 
hardly be used to believe that the petitioners-defendants were just 
benamidars. Moreover, mere presence of a person at the time of 
attestation of a mutation is not sufficient to believe that he or any of 
his blood relations is the purchaser of the land and the person in 
whose favour the mutation is being attested is just a benamidar. 
According to section 42 of the Land Revenue Act, 1967, a mutation 
should be based on some transaction and the same should be attested 
in presence of witnesses and upon identification of the vendor by the 
Lamberdar, Patidar or co-owner in a village. As far as these matters 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--32-- 
 
 
 
are concerned, the most relevant persons to clarify as to whether the 
petitioners-defendants were just benamidars or not were the vendors 
but respondent No.1 did not bother to produce them in evidence to 
unveil the truth. It is well entrenched by now that when a party 
withholds best available evidence inference goes against it. Reliance 
in this regard is placed on the judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan in the matter of Muhammad Boota through L.Rs. v. Mst. 
Bano Begum and others (2005 SCMR 1885). 
 
29. 
It is cardinal principle of civil jurisprudence that when a party 
alleges a particular fact it is bound to prove the same and when 
respondent No.1 pleaded that he paid the entire amount of 
consideration against purchase of suit properties, subject matter of the 
suits, he was bound to prove the said fact but when he failed to prove 
the same he could not be given premium of any deficiency in the case 
of the petitioners-defendants as he was bound to establish through 
evidence of impeachable character that he was the real owner whereas 
the petitioners-defendants were just benamidars.   
 
30. 
While scanning the judgment passed by learned Appellate 
Court, I have observed that it formed adverse opinion against the 
petitioners-defendants for the reason that Major (R) Ijaz was not 
produced in evidence by them to prove that he was acting on their 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--33-- 
 
 
 
behalf and transferred an amount of more than Rs.13 crores in the 
bank account of respondent No.1 which was utilized by him for 
purchase of the suit properties. At the same time, learned Appellate 
Court omitted to note that when respondent No.1 alleged that the 
aforesaid amount was received by him from Major (R) Ijaz, out of his 
outstanding amount, as to how his suits could be decreed without 
establishing said fact by producing Major (R) Ijaz or other relevant 
person(s). In the given circumstances, the omission to produce Major 
(R) Ijaz is more fatal for respondent No.1 as compared to the 
petitioners-defendants inasmuch as respondent No.1, who challenged 
the status of the petitioners-defendants as owners, was bound to prove 
that they were just benamidars. 
  
31. 
At the cost of repetition, it is observed that the Apex Court of 
the country in the case of Muhammad Yousaf & others (supra) has 
settled that without establishing the relationship between the real 
owner and alleged benamidar, suit to declare a person as benamidar 
cannot be decreed. Insofar as the cases in hand are concerned, though 
respondent No.1 claimed that he had business relations with the 
petitioners-defendants but his said stance was contradicted by his own 
son (PW-1), who, during cross-examination, stated in clear cut words 
that he did not know the petitioners-defendants. Further, when the 
nature and scope of alleged business relation of respondent No.1 with 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--34-- 
 
 
 
the petitioners-defendants was not clarified mere oral assertion of 
respondent No.1 could not be used against the petitioners-defendants. 
 
32. 
Further, conduct of the parties plays pivotal role in a suit 
challenging benami transaction. As far as the cases in hand are 
concerned, respondent No.1 miserably failed to establish any previous 
direct relationship between the parties justifying transfer of the suit 
properties by him in the names of the petitioners-defendants. 
Reference in this regard is made to the following portion from the 
cross-examination of respondent No.1 (PW-4): 
 
***
 درتس ےہ ہک ریمی رفخ زہشاد ےک اسھت یسک مسق یکpartnership
 ہن ریہ ےہ۔ 
From the above quoted portion from the cross-examination of 
respondent No.1 (PW-4), it stands established that he failed to prove 
his relationship with the petitioners-defendants justifying transfer of 
the suit properties in their names as benamidars. When such important 
limb was missing, learned Appellate Court was not justified to set 
aside the well-reasoned judgment & decree passed by the learned 
Trial Court. 
 
33. 
Though, respondent No.1 averred in the plaints of his suits that 
the petitioners-defendants admitted themselves to be benamidars but 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--35-- 
 
 
 
said assertion stands nullified from the following portion from cross-
examination of PW-1: - 
"
*****
 ےھجم ولعمم ہن ےہہک دماععلی ھم ےن ے ما ی دار وہما نک نک ےک اسےنم میلست ایک۔" 
 
The above quoted portion from the statement of PW-1 is sufficient to 
disbelieve the assertion of respondent No.1 that the petitioners-
defendants admitted that they were just benamidars. Moreover, when 
respondent No.1 failed to establish that the petitioners-defendants 
permitted him to get transferred the suit properties in their names, 
learned Appellate Court committed grave illegality while reversing 
the findings of learned Trial Court.  
 
34. 
A perusal of the impugned judgments and decrees shows that 
learned Appellate Court has held that since point of limitation was not 
raised by the petitioners-defendants, no Issue could be framed by 
learned Trial Court. In this regard, I do not find myself in agreement 
with the learned Appellate Court for the reason that as per section 3 of 
the Limitation Act, 1908, at the time of entertaining any matter it is 
duty of the Court to see as to whether proceedings have been filed 
within the prescribed period of limitation or not, notwithstanding the 
fact as to whether the said point has been raised by the opposite side 
or not. In this regard, I stand guided by a very illuminated judgment of 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan reported as Chief Engineer, 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--36-- 
 
 
 
Gujranwala Electric Power Company (GEPCO) Gujranwala v. 
Khalid Mehmood (2023 SCMR 291) wherein the issue, under 
discussion, has been clinched in the following manner:- 
“12.***** The Court is obliged to independently advert to the 
question of limitation and determine the same and to take 
cognizance of delay without limitation having been set up as a 
defence by any party……….. The Court under Section 3 of the 
Limitation Act is obligated independently rather as a primary 
duty to advert the question of limitation and make a decision, 
whether this question is raised by other party or not.” 
 
If the observation of learned Appellate Court, under discussion, is 
seen in the light of above-quoted judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of Pakistan it becomes more than clear that no illegality was 
committed by learned Trial Court while framing Issue qua limitation.  
 
35. 
It is pertinent to mention over here that according to Article 120 
of the Limitation Act, 1908, maximum period to challenge any 
transaction in a declaratory suit is six years whereas in these matters 
though the subject mutations were attested in the year 2005 but 
respondent No.1 filed suits in the year 2013 meaning thereby that the 
same were barred by law of limitation. With a view to wriggle out of 
dilemma of limitation, respondent No.1 tried to plead that he could 
not file suits within the prescribed period of limitation due to 
pendency of suit for pre-emption. Firstly, pendency of suit for pre-
emption was not a bar to challenge the subject transactions on the 
basis of benamidar and secondly when respondent No.1 filed the 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--37-- 
 
 
 
subject suits, during pendency of matter relating to pre-emption before 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, his said assertion becomes 
irrelevant. In this backdrop, the suits filed by respondent No.1 were 
liable to be dismissed on that score alone.  
 
36. 
There is no cavil with the proposition that when sufficient cause 
is shown, delay in filing of any proceedings before a court of law can 
be condoned but when such cause is missing, the courts should not 
feel shy to dismiss the proceedings on that score alone. Reliance in 
this regard can be placed on the case reported as Chief Executive 
Officer NPGCL, GENCO-III, TPS Muzaffargarh v. Khalid Umar 
Tariq Imran and others (2024 SCMR 518) wherein the issue under 
discussion has been replied in the following words: - 
 
“14. Even otherwise, the public interest requires that there 
should be an end to litigation. The law of limitation provides an 
element of certainty in the conduct of human affairs. The law of 
limitation is a law that is designed to impose quietus on legal 
dissensions and conflicts. It requires that persons must come to 
Court and take recourse to legal remedies with due diligence. 
Therefore, the limitation cannot be regarded as a mere 
technicality. With the expiration of the limitation period, 
valuable rights accrue to the other party, as observed in 
numerous judgments by this Court. However, reference may be 
made to the cases of Ghulam Rasool and others v. Ahmad Yar 
and others (2006 SCMR 1458); Collector Sales Tax (East), 
Karachi v. Customs, Excise and Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal, 
Karachi and another (2008 SCMR 435) and Messrs SKB-KNK 
Joint Venture Contractors through Regional Director v. Water 
and Power Development Authority and others (2022 SCMR 
1615).” 
 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--38-- 
 
 
 
As far as petitions in hand are concerned, respondent No.1 took plea 
that as the matter was pending before the Civil Court in suit for 
possession through pre-emption, he could not file the suits within 
time. Reference in this regard is made to the following from the 
statement of respondent No.1 (PW-4):- 
 
"
*****
 ااقتنالت4227
 
 ںیم وہےئ اور ہی دوعی ے ما ی4205
 
 ںیم دارئ ایک۔ آھٹ اسل ںیم ےن
"دوعی اس ےئل دارئ ہن ایک ہک ش فع ےک دوعے دارئ وہ ےئگ ےھت۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔۔ 
  The aforesaid stance of respondent No.1 was contradicted by his son 
who, while appearing as PW-1, in his cross-examination, stated as 
under: - 
*****”
 ااقتنالت4227
 
 ںیم وہےئ اور سیک4205
 
 ںیم دارئ ےئک اس وہج ےس ہک دماععلی ھم وخد یہ
ان ےک اپس آاجںیئ ےگ۔“
 
The above material contradictions amongst the statements of PWs, on 
the point of limitation, also go against respondent No.1 and findings 
of learned Appellate Court on the said point being erroneous in nature 
cannot sustain.  
 
37. 
It is of common knowledge that land developers manage 
purchase of land for their prospective projects through their agents/ 
land providers. Respondent No.1, while appearing in the witness box 
as PW-4, admitted that he used to transfer properties in favour of 
other persons after purchasing from the land owners. He further 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--39-- 
 
 
 
admitted that Major (R) Ijaz had been acting as front man on behalf of 
Malik Riaz, a renowned developer of the country who happens to be 
close relative of the petitioners-defendants. Reliance in this regard is 
placed on the following portion from his statement as PW-4:- 
*****”
 
 ون واےل وک اجاتن وہں۔ درتس ےہ ہک ںیم اعرم ااحسق ، زنی کلم
 
ںیم کلم رایض رحبہی اٹئ
 اور املسن ادمح وک یھب اجاتن وہں۔ہی کلم رایض ےک داامد ںیہ۔ ریمے ان ےک اسھتbusiness 
relation
 
 ےھت۔درتس ےہ ہک رجیم ااجعز ڑباBusinessman
 ےہ۔ ہی کلم رایض ےک ےئل
property
 اک اکم رکات ےہ۔۔۔۔“
 
  
The afore-quoted portion from the statement of respondent No.1 (PW-
4) lends support to plea of the petitioners-defendants that respondent 
No.1 used to act as an agent on their behalf and after purchase of land 
ultimately used to transfer the same in their names and other 
developers of housing schemes for execution of their respective 
projects. 
 
38. 
While addressing the Court, learned counsel representing 
respondent No.1 put much emphasis on the fact that as son of 
respondent No.1 had been contesting the suit for pre-emption, as 
attorney, it was to be believed that respondent No.1 was the real 
owner of the suit land. In this regard, it is clarified that mere pursuing 
a lis as attorney per-se does not declare a person as owner, thus, said 
fact can hardly be used to believe respondent No.1 as owner of the 
suit properties.  

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--40-- 
 
 
 
  
39. 
It is very interesting to note that during entire pleadings, 
respondent No.1 claimed that he being unknown to Major (R) Ijaz 
Mahmood, it was not believable that he acted on behalf of the 
petitioners-defendants. The said contention of respondent No.1 stands 
contradicted from the contents of suit for declaration, mandatory and 
permanent injunction filed by him against said Major (R) Ijaz, while 
portraying him as Managing Director, Renaissance Developers (Pvt.) 
Ltd., Khan Chambers, 60-Canning Road, Saddar, Rawalpindi Cantt. 
Further, PW-1, son of respondent No.1, in his cross-examination, 
admitted that Major (R) Ijaz was known to him.  
 
40. 
There is no cudgel that in a benami transaction, real owner(s) 
can challenge the title of benamidar while seeking declaration that he 
is real owner of the property but the same is subject to fulfillment of 
the conditions repeatedly highlighted by the superior courts in 
plethora of judgments which in my humble opinion are missing in 
these matters, thus, the findings of learned Appellate Court are not 
tenable.   
 
41. 
It is indisputable that most of the documentary evidence, before 
the learned Trial Court, was produced through the statement of the 
counsel for respondent No.1. Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, in 
the case of  Manzoor Hussain (deceased) through L.Rs v. Misri Khan 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--41-- 
 
 
 
(PLD 2020 SC 749), while devising guidelines for production of 
documentary evidence and deprecating production thereof through the 
statement of the counsel, has inter-alia laid law to the following 
effect:- 
 
“4. 
Before parting with this case we would like to comment 
on a related matter. Copies of the acknowledgement receipt 
(exhibit P4), aks shajarah kishtwar (exhibit P2), registered post 
receipt (exhibit P3), mutation (exhibit P5) and jamabandi for 
the year 2000-2001 (exhibit P6) were produced and exhibited 
by the pre-emptor's counsel, but without him testifying. We 
have noted that copies of documents, having no concern with 
counsel, are often tendered in evidence through a simple 
statement of counsel but without administering an oath to him 
and without him testifying, especially in the province of 
Punjab. Ordinarily, documents are produced through a witness 
who testifies on oath and who may be cross-examined by the 
other side. However, there are exceptions with regard to facts 
which need not be proved; these are those which the Court will 
take judicial notice of under Article 111 of the Qanun-e-
Shahadat Order, 1984 and are mentioned in Article 112, and 
facts which are admitted (Article 113, Qanun-e-Shahadat 
Order, 1984).” (emphasis provided) 
 
If the fate of the judgments rendered by learned Appellate Court is 
adjudged in the light of the guidelines provided by the Apex Court of 
the country in the afore-quoted judgment it becomes conspicuously 
clear that most of the documents relied upon by learned Appellate 
Court, having been produced during the statement of counsel for 
respondent No.1 instead of the relevant witnesses, same could not be 
read in evidence while accepting the appeals filed by him. 
 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--42-- 
 
 
 
42. 
Insofar as intention of the petitioners-defendants to lodge 
criminal proceedings against respondent No.1 is concerned, suffice it 
to note that the same having no nexus with the lis before the Court, 
cannot be discussed in these proceedings rather it is upto them to put 
the criminal machinery into motion.  
 
43. 
Learned counsel representing respondent No.1 repeatedly 
argued that since his client has been possessing and managing the 
properties in question, he was real owner whereas petitioners-
defendants were just benamidars. There is no cavil with the fact that 
subsequent conduct of parties in a suit based on benami transaction is 
very relevant. Insofar as the cases under discussion are concerned, the 
following portions from the cross-examination of PW-1 are very 
relevant.  
***”ےھجم ولعمم ہن ےہ ہک سک اعمدہہ ںیم ینتک رمق یھت
۔“
 
***”ےھجم ااقتنالت ےک ربمنز اید ہن ںیہ۔“
 
***”
 ااقتنل ربمن4:66
 
 ںیم رخدیار وکن اھت ےھجم اید ہن ےہ۔ ااقتنل ربمن497:
 
 اور4;98
 
 ںیم رخدیار
وکن ںیہ ےھجم اید ہن ںیہ۔ ریمے وادل اصبح وک ولعمم ےہ ےھجم ولعمم ہن ےہ۔ ہک دم اععلی ھم ےن ے ما ی
دار وہما نک نک ےک اسےنم میلست ایک۔“
 
 
Similarly, respondent No.1, while appearing as PW-4, in reply to a 
suggestion regarding the identification of the properties, subject 
matter of the suits, inter-alia stated as under:- 
*****”مجھے
 اس و
تق اید ہن ےہ ہک ریما اعمدہہ نک نک ارفاد ےس وہا اھت۔ 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--43-- 
 
 
 
ےھجم  ااقتنالت یوعوعہی ےک ربمنز اید ہن ںیہ۔ 
*****
 ےھجم اید ہن ےہ ہک الہپ ااقتنل یوعوعہی ینتک رمق ےک وعض درج اور دصتقی وہا۔ ایس رطح ابیق
ااقتنالت ںیم رمق عیب اک ملع ہن ےہ۔ 
***اس وتق ےھجم اس وٹپاری ، اق
نونگو 
 ووں ےن ہی ااقتنالت درج اور
اور دلیصحتار ےک مام اید ہن ںیہ۔ج ہ ن 
دصتقی ےیک۔ 
*****
 ےلہپ ااقتنل یوعوعہی رپابعئ ےن دطختس ےیک ای اوگنےھٹ وگلاےئ ےھجم اید ہن ےہ۔دورسے اور
رسیتے ااقتنالت ںیم یھب اید ہن ےہ ہک اوگنےھٹ اگل
ےئ ای دطختس ےیک۔ 
*****ےھجم اید ہن ےہ ہک ےلہپ ااقتن ل4:66
 اک رخدیار وکن اھت اس رطح دو
سر ے497:
 
 اور رسیتے
4698
 ںیم رخدیار وکن اھت ولعمم ہن ےہ۔“
 
In the wake of afore-quoted stances of PW-1 & PW-4 it cannot be 
believed that respondent No.1 was real owner and had been dealing 
with the properties as owner and petitioners-defendants were just 
benamidars. It is very difficult to believe that a person, who claims 
himself to be owner of a property, is not aware about its exact 
identification despite the fact that he claims that he has been dealing 
with it since the year 2005.  
 
44. 
As a necessary corollary to the above discussion, I have no 
hesitation to hold that learned Appellate Court not only misread the 
evidence of the parties but also misapplied the law on the subject. 
Further, it exercised the jurisdiction relating to production of 
additional evidence in a perfunctory manner. Consequently, all these 
petitions are accepted, as a result, the judgments & decrees of learned 
Appellate Court are set aside. Consequently, the appeals as well as the 
applications filed by respondent No.1, seeking permission to lead 

 
 
 
C. R. No. 56505/2022. 
--44-- 
 
 
 
additional evidence, would stand dismissed and judgments & decrees 
passed by learned Trial Court shall hold the field. No order as to costs. 
 
 
Judge 
 
Announced in Open Court today i.e._30.04.2024________  
Approved for Reporting. 
Judge 
G.R. 

